____________________________________________________________

Saving the Sheepscot

Author: Austin, Phyllis

Publication info: Maine Times ; Portland, Me. [Portland, Me]01 Nov 2001: 1.

https://search.proquest.com/docview/246917709?accountid=10457

Abstract: None available.

Links: http://CX2EF4JW8J.search.serialssolutions.com/directLink?&amp;atitle=Saving+the+Sheepscot&amp;author=Austin%2C+Phyllis&amp;issn=00250783&amp;title=Maine+Times&amp;volume=34&amp;issue=26&amp;date=2001-11-01&amp;spage=1&amp;id=doi:&amp;sid=ProQ_ss&amp;genre=article

Full text: When Stewart Thomson bought an 83-acre parcel on the Sheepscot River in Alna last year, he knew the landscape was beautiful and secluded. But it was only when he explored the midcoast river in his kayak that he felt how wild it is. "You don't see buildings," he said, with a generous amount of amazement in his voice. "You feel like you could be in the 17th century!"
Thomson grew up in Michigan in "pristine, natural" surroundings and then lived in Boston and other cities for 20 years to pursue a financial services career. He was planning to use his restored Cape on the Sheepscot as a getaway to relax and enjoy the outdoors again. However, the river land mesmerized him, and he's now a I full-time resident.
Thomson's land is halfway down the three-mile paddle of the river between Head Tide and Sheepscot Village that has almost no visible shorefront development and is owned in relatively large tracts. If the Sheepscot Valley Conservation Association's dream comes true, that section will be preserved for all time as "forever wild."
SVCA one of Maine's most active and influential land trusts, has mounted a campaign to create a 300-foot-wide, no-new-development corridor in the upper estuary. "We have a steadily closing window of opportunity to protect this corridor" in Aina and Newcastle, given the pace of growth in the region, said Nigel Calder, chairman of the "forever wild" subcommittee. The 2000 census found that Lincoln County, a retirement mecca, had Maine's second highest population increase, nearly 11 percent (30,357 to 33,616).
Not everyone agrees with Calder about the immediacy of the threat: Though new residences are common, Alna has no multi-home subdivisions so far.
However, there's no denying there are major transportation projects underway that will bring more residential and commercial development into the region - the widened Maine Turnpike, the Wiscasset/Route 1 Bypass and the Boston-toPortland Amtrak run. (An important link, the new Sagahadoc Bridge in Bath, has already been completed.) Jeff Reardon, head of the New England chapter of Trout Unlimited, added that if even one large company like MBNA located in the Sheepscot area, it would bring "major watershed scale development."
The "forever wild" proposal is one of three major conservation initiatives of SVCA, along with protection of the Atlantic salmon habitat and the relatively undeveloped Marsh River ecosystem. Federal designation of the salmon as endangered "gives [the forever wild campaign] momentum," said land trust board member Bambi Jones, and it makes funding available to SVCA that it might not otherwise receive.
Lay of the land
The Sheepscot, with a 228-square-mile watershed, is one of seven Maine rivers with native Atlantic salmon. Also, the river has annual runs of alewives and American eels, and may have remnant populations of American shad and North American oysters, said Gail Wippelhauser, a scientist with the Department of Marine Resources. The intertidal zone contains several rare and endangered plants, according to Andy Cutko, an ecologist with the Maine Natural Areas Program. He mentioned the salt marsh false foxglove and the globally rare Parker's pipewort. There are also uncommon species of salt marsh sparrows.
While SVCA will rely mostly on the donation of conservation easements to protect the "forever wild" corridor, the land trust is prepared to buy shoreland outright (when necessary) to protect salmon habitat.
The proposed corridor is bordered by thick forests and tidal marshes along most of the three miles. Already, SVCA has protected 1.7 miles of shoreline. That it has such a wild character today is testament to how much the Sheepscot has recovered from historic land abuses, said Mark DesMeules, who lives on the river in Alna and is executive director of the Damariscotta River Association. But the "forever wild" stretch is only a small segment of the 58-mile river.
There are 20 communities in the watershed in four counties, most of them in Lincoln County. There are long-standing problems above the corridor that need to be resolved before the river can be fully restored and Atlantic salmon can be saved, DesMeules insisted. Specifically, he pointed to water quality degradation from farming and shoreland zoning violations and the detrimental effect of the Coopers Mills dam on salmon.
DesMeules charged that the Department of Agriculture is refusing to regulate farmers, despite the implications for salmon and the general health of the river and its riparian zone. "Essentially, they have almost looked the other way," he contended. "They don't want to play the bad guy, and this is four years after the [riparian] inventory [of critical habitat] and the Maine Salmon Conservation Plan."
Among the plan's recommendations were removal of the Coopers Mills dam, implementation of a nonpoint pollution program and promotion of Best Management Practices by farmers.
Craig Leonard, Agriculture's compliance supervisor, acknowledged continuing pollution problems from a few dairy farms but, at the same time, said progress is being made. "If you go in with a stick - unless you've got a good one, you'd better stay away," he said.
The relatively large tracts of forest under individual ownership in the "forever wild" corridor make the Sheepscot unusual, affirmed Jim Cosgrove of Newcastle Realty. The Sheepscot area "has always been very desirable" because of its riverfront, he said. The historic Sheepscot Village, at the southern end of the corridor, is "quintessential Maine," Cosgrove said.
He believes the presence of Atlantic salmon adds to the cachet of being on the Sheepscot. Cosgrove also emphasized the growing importance of privacy. "People we see - the more well heeled - are looking for absolute privacy, and we use [privacy] in our ads. They don't want to see or hear or look at other people," he said. "We hear that over and over."
But all rivers in populous southern Maine face conflict between protection and development What makes the Sheepscot different? Of all the salmon rivers, it's the closest to Greater Portland, said Mike Herz, president of SVCA's board of directors. "It has been settled for generations," unlike the Downeast salmon rivers, he noted. Consequently, it has many more landowners that make for complicated negotiations for protection. But the Sheepscot doesn't have the industrial pressures that the Downeast rivers face, such as major water withdrawals for blueberry and cranberry production.
Fred Kircheis, executive director of the state's Atlantic Salmon Commission, returned to the land use issue raised by DesMeules. The Sheepscot is "the only [salmon] river with significant agriculture in the form of dairy cows and runoff [from farms] and shoreland degradation from that runoff," he said.
For all of those reasons, the SVCA has determined that it needs to increase its protection efforts. The full-time executive director was hired recently, along with the salmon habitat coordinator. The land trust also has a part-time office manager, plus scores of volunteers.
Mike Herz, former chairman of Friends of the Earth, lived long enough in San Francisco when he was the baykeeper to see how quickly development can get the upper hand over conservation. "No single [house] will spell the demise of the Sheepscot," he said. But if the land is fragmented into two-acre lots, the effect will be to "kill it by 1,000 cuts," said Herz.
Reversing history
The natural world that Stewart Thomson senses today on the Sheepscot's upper estuary reflects a centuries-old past. "A wild, diverse forest ranging from boreal coniferous to mixed soft-and-hardwoods covered the ... basin," wrote Kirsten George of the Sheepscot Wellspring Alliance in Wild Earth magazine. "Towering white pines with diameters up to eight feet dominated the edges of waterways." Atlantic salmon were abundant, and wolves, mountain lions, black bear and the Wabanaki people "were among the many fish-eating inhabitants of the area," said George.
By the mid-1700s, the Wabanaki Indian "presence in the Sheepscot was marginalized to the point it was over." Settlers and new immigrants, including many Germans, were attracted to the Sheepscot because of its abundance of natural resources. In 1831, the Rev. Samuel Johnson wrote in his Account of an Ancient Settlement on the Sheepscot River that "Sheepscot in her marshes, both salt and fresh, her unrivalled soil, magnificent forests and spring 'run' of salmon, shad and alewives, and also in her Mills sites and easy access to the sea, was a gem of untold worth to the agriculturist and planter, and presented facilities and prospects of a brightened character to many, who were less charmed by the allurements of a dwelling at the ocean side."
In their exploitation of resources, the settlers overcut, overhunted, overfished and polluted the river with sawdust and other sediment. The adverse results caused many Sheepscot residents to join the westward migration in the late 1800s. Under less pressure, it wasn't long before the Sheepscot began to recover. But throughout much of the 1900s, the area population was in decline.
In the 1960s, the "back-to-the-landers" discovered the Sheepscot Valley. They were joined in the '70s by retirees like Joe Barth, who played a pivotal role in the founding of SVCA, in the '80s by attorney/organic farmer Bambi Jones, who began acquiring forest land to insure its protection, and in the '90s by Mike Herz, Nigel Calder and other well-connected professionals (a number of them in the environmental field). Regardless of when they arrived, they all would sound a clarion call for permanent protection of the Sheepscot.
In the beginning were the Barths
The Barth family of Alna has long been identified with conservation of the Sheepscot, going back more than 40 years. Joe Barth, a Unitarian Universalist minister, and his wife, Ramona, bought the old farm property known as Parsons Bend for a summer retreat in the late 1930s. Over the years, he became famous for hybridizing lilies; she, for her liberal feminist politics. The couple retired to Alna in 1976.
The Barths amassed 150 acres in different parcels on the Alna and Newcastle sides of the river, according to son Nick. Eventually, all four Barth sons also bought Sheepscot land; some of which is planned for easement protection through SCVA.
Nick Barth recalled that it was Columbus Day 1969 that SVCA was officially created, and Joe Barth served as its president for many years. Nick Barth, whose training and passion was watershed conservation, said it was he who "planted the seed for a watershed association to focus on conservation of the Sheepscot Valley." His father took the helm at that time because Nick lived out-of-state. But he advised his father about SCVA affairs from away, he said. When he returned to Alna for good, Nick Barth took over the helm of SVCA and is currently a director.
SVCA, the second-oldest land trust in Maine, had a broad land, water and historic resources conservation mission from the start - and a dual purpose, said Nick Barth. In addition to protecting land, the association took on an advocacy role, he explained. "It's very difficult to wear those two hats at the same time. But my thinking was to use them as synergies."
From the get-go, SVCA didn't wait for anyone to tell it what to do or for a government agency to carry out a needed study. In the 70s, the land trust wanted to better understand how stream flow regulation affected Atlantic salmon habitat and arranged for a study. It drew up guidelines for locating new highways and presented them to the Department of Transportation. SVCA obtained funding for a natural resources inventory covering the eight coastal towns in the watershed and convinced Harvard University graduate students to carry out the work. To determine whether water standards are being met and to identify sources of pollution, SVCA began a 10-year monitoring program in 1994. The effort measures the success of restoration and salmon habitat protection activities, as well as whether statewide water classification and recreational use standards are being met.
On the advocacy front, the land trust was a major intervenor in 1971-72 in the licensing of Maine Yankee. "At the time Maine Yankee was 90 percent complete," Barth recalled. "The safeguards that were in place were almost nothing. No emergency evacuation, no safe storage of spent fuel." SVCA's strategy was to raise questions "they couldn't answer" instead of trying to stop the licensing of the facility as Ray Shadis' anti-nuclear group tried to do. "We tried to make it as safe as we could," he said.
Later, SVCA took on the proposed Wiscasset-Edgecomb bridge, securing changes in the design and preventing the filling of more wetlands. It argued successfully with local officials for a deeper shoreland setback when Patten Corp. proposed a subdivision on the Newcastle side of the river. (The company never followed through, but other realtors picked up the property and sold it off in pieces.) SVCA was involved in the proposed mobile asphalt plant in the Crooker gravel pit in Alna/Whitefield that would have posed threats to the Sheepscot in the event of an oil spill. (That plant wasn't constructed.)
More than a decade ago, SVCA began participating in public policy and planning for transportation in the Route 1 corridor and organized an independent citizens group to develop alternatives to the DOT's proposals. It was a catalyst in creating a new organization, the Midcoast Alliance for Planning, whose efforts will be environmental and quality-of-life protection and prevention of uncontrolled sprawl.
Like many grassroots organizations, SVCA operated on a shoestring for years. Nick Barth recalled the first year's budget was $150; today it's $347,400, most of which comes from foundation and government sources.
The first piece of land SVCA actually owned was a donation from the Walker family in 1977 - 4 acres of wetlands below Head Tide. Not long afterward, an individual gave the land trust a conservation casement on 600 feet of shore north of Sheepscot Village in the proposed "forever wild" corridor. Building on those acquisitions, SVCA now claims 930 acres protected in Alna, Boothbay Harbor, Newcastle and Wiscasset - the majority through voluntary easements. In miles of frontage, that adds up to 9.4 miles on the main stem of the Sheepscot and 1.6 miles on the tributaries that run into the Sheepscot and the adjoining Dyer River.
New activists arrive
The '90s were a turning point for SVCA. "A bunch of new blood came into town" with experience with land trusts and writing grants - and they bought land on the river - said DesMeules, himself part of the influx. "We were interested in using our professional skills in our own back yards, and within a few years" SVCA redefined its goals, and the board was revamped.
Herz became the new president in 1999, and the "forever wild" concept was developed in 1997. It was in that year that SVCA faced a new subdivision proposal in the middle of that corridor. A developer envisioned a straw bale cohousing project for a dozen families. SVCA turned to outside funders and raised enough money to buy the 67-acre parcel with 900 feet on the river. Later, the land trust sold, with restrictions, one acre for one house, and the rest is now protected as the Bass Falls Preserve.
There are 59 owners in the "forever wild corridor" and 21 are members or supporters of SVCA, spurring the land trust to speed up easement discussions before opportunities are lost. The largest landowner in that section has a mile of shore frontage on the Newcastle side. "An awful lot is going on," said Executive Director Sam Merrill, but he wasn't ready to discuss publicly the negotiations in progress.
Much work is also going into conservation of the Marsh River shore, he said. Even though we have [the Sheepscot and Marsh rivers] as separate priorities, we see them linked" ecologically. The Marsh River environs are the largest relatively roadless area in the region, according to Merrill. "It has been identified by the Maine Natural Areas Program for having "significant, tremendous rare species and natural features," he said, and is "one of just a few 'whole places' for the granddaddy of land trusts, the Maine Coast Heritage Trust."
While SVCA has protected more acres than any other land trust working in the watershed, it is not alone in its successes. The Sheepscot Wellspring Land Alliance, based in Freedom, has focused on the headwaters of the river, protecting 432 acres in seven parcels since its formation in 1991. The Boothbay Land Trust has protected about 450 acres on the Sheepscot, from lower Mack Island to Wiscasset. That is about half of all of that land trust's acquisitions, said Dawn Marshall, "most of it fee acquisitions."
Concern over salmon
In early October, SVCA's Phil Gerard drove me along the Sheepscot River from Alna to Coopers Mills to see some of the prime salmon habitat and the dam that's the most controversial obstacle to migrating fish. It's his job to design a conservation plan to protect the salmon. Gerard, who teaches biology at the University of Maine at Augusta, was formerly director of the Maine Forest Biodiversity Project and former president of the Georges River Land Trust.
Salmon, he explained, have been officially documented in the Sheepscot for over 50 years. For the last 15 years, there have been documented nests made by adult salmon, he said. "it was thought last year there were 10 [adults]."
The million-dollar question that fuels the salmon's endangered species listing is whether the Sheepscot salmon are wild or kin of stocked salmon. "They've been stocking all the rivers for a long time," he acknowledged. "Are the smolts running out Ito sea] wild or ones we stocked?"
"In the next two years we'll know," Gerard said. When the biologists "dropped off the fry this year, they put a calcine dye on them. When they put the fish under an ultraviolet light, it will turn green if it was stocked or the offspring of a salmon that came up the river independently. That test will be a breakthrough" in the stocking-versus-natural debate, he said.
The endangered listing is providing federal funds for purchasing shorefront land in salmon spawning areas, generally above Head Tide. "My job was to narrow down the places where we could make the biggest difference," Gerard said. "The greatest thing about SVCA is they have this really great mapping system. It's unusual for a land trust to have this."
He entered the wealth of data and came up with the half-dozen focus areas. They are river areas that have tumbling waters that provide a lot of oxygenation, deep pools, eddies and bottom with the loose gravel where adults like to make a nest. The Maine Salmon Conservation Plan identified 300 parcels adjacent to and on the river that are critical salmon habitat, Mike Herz said. Most of them are above the Head Tide dam.
Gerard has contacted about 90 landowners in the six areas by mail and said there's "some level of interest. People have a lot of worry that their rights as landowners could be diminished" by giving an easement, he said, but Gerard has "about 10 projects in the works."
"The big interest is in voluntary donation of conservation easements," he said. Or, there are situations SVCA will purchase outright. "We will close on a 28-acre property in Palermo in a few days," Gerard said. "How critical it is to buy, rather than put under an easement, depends to some degree on the approach to shoreland zoning of towns in the watershed." Some have 250-foot resource protection zones along the river that bans development and limits timber harvesting, while others allow building between 75 and 100 feet of the shore. "in the end," he said, "it also can come down to opportunity and have nothing to do with land conservation or biological information."
"There's a lot of debate over what's causing the decline of salmon," Gerard said. "There was a lot of focus on what's going on in the oceans; now it's on the freshwater side." SVCA's water quality monitoring program has found that the Sheepscot's main offshoot, the West Branch, "for years has not met the basic water quality standards, mostly for E. coli counts." It's unclear whether the bacteria comes from livestock or poor sewage systems or other discharges," Gerard said.
Agriculture's Craig Leonard said his agency has enforcement authority to bring farmers into compliance with river protection regulations. "If a farmer refuses, we can Lake steps. But sometimes, enforcement is not the answer. It takes too long," he explained. "We encourage them to strive to implement Best Management Practices on their own."
Leonard said complaints have been made against five farms in the AlnaWhitefield area, and one has gone out of business. "We're working with the Natural Resources Conservation Service to develop a plan," he said. "One farmer has completed a plan. One is dragging, but NRCS, is working hard with him."
Correcting problems
There is agreement on the adverse impact of dams on salmon. There are three dams on the Sheepscot, but two (Head Tide and King's Mills) have holes in them, allowing salmon to migrate upstream as they please. At Coopers Mills, it's a different story. "This is a significant obstruction on the river," Gerard declared.
When the water is low at the Coopers Mills dam, as it has been for months, the fishway is impossible for salmon, and Gerard said the dam leaks to boot. "This dam is a big issue financially and socially," he said. The dam has created a "basin" behind it that locals like to use recreationally, and the fire department draws water from it.
Fred Kircheis said the commission "would like to see [the Coopers Mills dam] gone" because there are salmon upstream of the dam and the fishway is inadequate. But the commission hasn't taken an official position. Jeff Reardon of Trout Unlimited tried some years ago to push removal of the dam, but "it raised a hornet's nest of opposition" locally, he said. The only way it could be taken out in the future, he said, is for state agencies to take a strong position on the fish passage issue.
Reardon is also concerned with introduced species in the Sheepscot, specifically brown trout and smallmouth bass. "We don't know how well [brown trout] interact with salmon," he said. "There should be an evaluation" by IFW of possible interbreeding and occupying the same habitat.
Reardon agreed with others that problems from erosion and runoff from farms and road impacts from bridge crossings and culverts are more immediate problems than development. He was critical of the Sheepscot Watershed Council, which coordinates activities of various agencies and groups working to restore Atlantic salmon. It also works with communities on projects such as livestock exclusion fencing, overboard discharge removal and prevention of road sand and salt washing into the Sheepscot.
"We have come a long way in the last five years" with preventing problems from farms, Melissa Halsted, the council director, said, but NRCS doesn't have enforcement power. "That's left to Agriculture and DER Part of the problem is a state enforcement issue. To fall under the endangered species act as a violation, you've got to prove there's been a take of salmon, and that's difficult to do." Halsted also noted that the state opposed the endangered species listing of salmon and is now appealing the decision. "I'm not saying there's no support for salmon, because there is, but voluntary, rather than coming down heavy-handed," she said.
Until recently, Nick Barth thought agriculture, forestry and road-related impacts were more of a problem for the Sheepscot than development. But he's changed his mind. Barth has witnessed the subdivisions and incremental building on the principal tributaries from the southern to northern sections that "has been going on for 20 years." He pointed to the growing communities to which Sheepscot waters are oriented - the headwaters in Montville/Liberty to Waterville, and the Palermo/Windsor/Whitefield stretch to the capital of Augusta. "Closer south to the immediate coast, it's 'Katie, bar the door,"' Barth said. There's still time to act, he believes, but, like Mike Herz, he thinks it won't be long before the opportunity will be gone forever.

Subject: Rivers; Environmental protection; Activism

Location: Alna Maine

People: Thomson, Stewart

Company / organization: Name: Sheepscot Valley Conservation Association; NAICS: 813312

Classification: 1530: Natural resources; 9190: United States

Title: Saving the Sheepscot

Publication title: Maine Times; Portland, Me.

Volume: 34

Issue: 26

Pages: 1

Publication year: 2001

Publication date: Nov 01, 2001

Publisher: Maine Times

Place of publication: Portland, Me.

Country of publication: United States, Portland, Me.

Publication subject: Environmental Studies

ISSN: 00250783

Source type: Newspapers

Language of publication: English

Document type: News

ProQuest document ID: 246917709

Document URL: https://search.proquest.com/docview/246917709?accountid=10457

Copyright: Copyright Maine Times Nov 01, 2001

Last updated: 2012-02-16

Database: Global Newsstream

____________________________________________________________

Are lobsters overfished?

Author: Goodale, Wing

Publication info: Maine Times ; Portland, Me. [Portland, Me]08 June 2000: 16.

https://search.proquest.com/docview/246891060?accountid=10457

Abstract: None available.

Links: http://CX2EF4JW8J.search.serialssolutions.com/directLink?&amp;atitle=Are+lobsters+overfished%3F&amp;author=Goodale%2C+Wing&amp;issn=00250783&amp;title=Maine+Times&amp;volume=33&amp;issue=5&amp;date=2000-06-08&amp;spage=16&amp;id=doi:&amp;sid=ProQ_ss&amp;genre=article

Full text:   Are lobsters overfished? Those who haul their own traps or live on the coast would laugh at the question, wondering if you've seen the latest catch numbers. Even a neophyte such as myself, who's been on lobster boats only a handful of times, would point to the indisputable abundance of Homarus americanus in Maine waters.
Yet scientists and fishermen agree that the current high catch cannot last. Consequently, lobsters are technically considered overfished. Be assured the technical definition does not sit well with many people.
Lobsters were once so plentiful that in 1607 English settlers at the mouth of the Kennebec River could collect 50 lobsters in an hour; by the 1740s large lobsters could be bought in Boston for a penny and a half. Not only were lobsters plentiful, but immense. Some measured up to five feet in length, and a 40-pounder was not unusual. These large lobsters were collected on a subsistence level until the early 1800s, when a commercial fishery developed. By the mid-19th century, the average market lobster was four pounds, with 10- to 12-pounders still common. Today, the mean size is a little over 1 1/2 pounds.
Lobsters are found from Newfoundland to the Carolinas. To catch these nocturnal scavengers, lobstermen tune into the lobster's basic biology. Some fishermen head out to sea to catch deep-water lobsters, but most set traps in the crustacean-preferred rocky coastal habitat and use their favorite food, dead fish, as bait. In addition to eating dead organisms, lobsters can filterfeed, which allows them to survive for long periods in untended traps.
In Maine, lobstermen, state agencies and the federal government have, over the years, developed regulations to protect both the lobster stocks and the people who fish them. For example, the traditional trap is the only legal method of catching lobsters; diving and dragging are illegal. By requiring that the boat owner also be the operator, the state ensures corporations cannot take over the independent fishermen. And to prevent just anyone from entering lobstering there is an intensive apprenticeship program.
Regulations also apply to the gear. Lobstermen may not fish more than 800 traps, and these must have certain dimensions as well as escape vents for smaller lobsters, and panels that rust open in case a trap is lost.
Other regulations prevent lobstermen from keeping
lobsters under 3 1/4 inches or over five inches,
measured from the eye to the end of the back. In
addition, lobstermen cannot keep females with eggs. If
they catch a female, they are encouraged to cut a V
onotch in her tail, a practice started in 1917 and now
adopted nationally. The females are thus marked as
successful breeders and should never be harvested.
Leroy Bridges, president of the Downeast Lobstermen Association, believes the Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission, the federal regulatory group, is mismanaging the harvest of oversized lobters, which he believes are important breeders. In Area 1, extending from Eastern Maine to Cape Cod, fishermen are not able to keep lobsters with a back length over five inches. It is not legal for anyone in Maine to even possess such a lobster. But in Massachusetts and New Hampshire, where there is no law against possessing large lobsters, once they reach the land they become legal, even if they were illegally taken from the water. And since Area 1 stops at the tip of Cape Cod, dividing Massachusetts in half, enforcement of oversized lobsters is impossible.
Sen. Jill Goldthwait [I-Bar Harbor], also an ASMFC commissioner, said she was sickened by seeing a tank in Rhode Island full of oversized lobsters. Because lobsters can migrate long distances, these may be the same lobsters Maine lobstermen have carefully protected.
May has been a month of mixed feelings among lobstermen, prompted by the ASMFC's latest stock assessment, which was peer reviewed May 8-9. Prior to the review, the ASMFC sent out a thick draft report documenting high lobster abundance, above-average egg production, an increase in catch effort, and a 75 percent increase in Gulf of Maine landings from 198297. The report admits that the Gulf of Maine stocks "may be underestimated," but still concludes that all the stocks are overfished, according to the growth and egg per recruit models.
The crux of the debate lies in the three types of overfishing - "recruitment," "growth" and "egg-perrecruit." Recruitment overfishing means the adult population is fished so intensively it cannot replace itself. Growth overfishing, not considered a serious threat to lobster stocks, means small lobsters are being caught more often than large ones, reducing the poundage being caught.
But the ASMFC overfishing index is calculated by the egg-per-recruit model. The model concludes that a stock is overfished when female lobsters are caught before they can produce 10 percent of the eggs they would in their normal 40-year life span. The ASMFC incorporates into the model all factors that affect how many eggs a female could produce - mortality, growth and reproductive characteristics. For the Gulf of Maine, the model calculates that female lobsters are only able to produce 3.5 percent of their capacity before being caught - thus, overfished. The report admits to uncertainty about the model; stocks have been rated overfished since 1982, yet abundance has increased.
Mention overfishing and people's hackles rise. Responses range from a vehement "no" from the presidents of lobstermen's associations, to the ASMFC's "yes," to the Maine Department of Marine Resources preferring not to take a position until the peer review is complete.
Steve Taylor, president of the Southern Maine Lobstermen's Association, says the overfishing benchmark was "pulled out of thin air." Carl Wilson of DMR feels the ASMFC overfishing definition is a good mark for responses, but managers need to consider other measures of the lobster population.
In the ASMFC report Dr. J. Idione offers a tempered view of the overfishing definition. He stresses that the overfishing threshold should not be a management goal, but rather a danger signal requiring management. Invalidating the overfishing definition by saying stocks have not collapsed is "entirely inappropriate." Detecting a stock collapse can take six years, the time it takes for lobster to reach legal size. Idione admits there is uncertainty, but says this should be met "by more conservative management - not less."
If the stock is considered overfished to the point where it needs more management, the ASMFC could recommend new policies, which can have the force of law. Managers and fishermen would need to attend numerous meetings to develop draft plans, revised plans, final plans - and amendments. These plans could reduce fishing effort or create catch quotas, as has been done for numerous other species.
Controlling effort usually centers around gear changes. Only two years ago lobstermen refitted their traps with larger vents, allowing more lobsters to escape, and the 800-trap limit took effect. Goldthwait is strongly opposed to quotas, concerned that lobstermen would lose their independence.
In response to recent gear changes, Taylor suggests "things should be left alone for a couple years to see what happens." Pat White, executive director of the Maine Lobstermen's Association, agrees, suggesting that future management options should be developed, but not implemented. Goldthwait thinks lobstermen need a break for a year, pointing out that it is difficult to run a business when the rules keep changing: "What if changes are made and we find we are wrong and people lose jobs?"
Not surprisingly, lobstermen are suspicious of how the ASMFC defines overfishing. As Goldthwait says, regardless of how overfishing is defined it is "completely contrary to what lobstermen experience." Lobstermen spend half their day tossing back "shorts," V-notching egg-bearing females, and returning oversized lobsters to the water. They bring in record hauls each year. They're incredulous when told they're overfishing.
Why are so many lobsters being caught? White says it could be many things, from water temperature to egg production, but he thinks we don't really know. Others feel fisheries move in cycles, and we remain in an extended upswing.
Some theorize that groundfish depletion may have reduced lobster predation, but Bob Steneck of University of Maine's Darling Center in Boothbay Harbor has a different view. He says large predatory groundfish have been absent from coastal zones for decades, and the recent decline of groundfish offshore has little or no impact on inshore lobsters. Wilson points out there are still many other predators, such as sculpin, that eat small lobsters and larva.
Some say lobster growth is supported by food from baited traps. Again, Steneck dissents, saying lobster abundance is determined by larva growth and the availability of hiding places. Traps may contribute to higher growth rates, but are not likely to account for a doubling in landings, he said.
The ASMFC report also offers reasons for the lobsters' success. South of Cape Cod, lobsters successfully reproduce one or two times before reaching catchable size, but in the Gulf of Maine most lobsters attain sexual maturity only after reaching legal size. These mature lobsters may move offshore where they are less likely to be trapped, and have an opportunity to reproduce. An alternate view is that lobster stocks are not limited by reproduction, and that favorable environmental conditions have increased larval survival.
Although most people I interviewed do not think the fishery is overfished, the DMR and the representatives of all the lobstermen's associations say the current abundance won't last. White says the fishery is becoming overharvested because people are fishing in new areas near shore. Taylor and Bridges say, based on years of experience, that hauls will level off or return to levels of a decade ago. DMR's Carl Wilson cites research conducted at the Bigelow Lab that showed low larva settlement patterns for the last four years in Penobscot Bay, and that lobstermen were not surprised by the data.
Although a downturn in hauls is widely anticipated, some fishermen are still suspicious of the ASMFC. Because management meetings are held out of state, lobstermen generally do not help collect data, and the information is presented in lengthy and complex documents. Taylor says "the feds don't care about taking someone's living away." Goldthwait says scientists need to "get the information to the public in a palatable format so that the expectations are different."
Leroy Bridges explained what happens. Voting on management questions occurs in Alexandria, Va., not an easy place to travel to; Bridges estimates that he loses $20,000 a year attending meetings. And Maine only has one vote, an "unreasonable" arrangement, he said. An attempt to change the weight of voting was unsuccessful because other states like the status quo. Thus North Carolina, a state that hauls under 100 pounds, has the same say as Maine, which in 1998 hauled nearly 48 million pounds - almost 60 percent of the lobsters caught in the U.S. Goldthwait says the onestate, one-vote system undermines trust.
The great challenge in fisheries management is to create a system in which fishermen, scientists and managers communicate successfully. Goldthwait cites a common problem between managers and scientists: Managers are looking for specific numbers by which to regulate, but scientists provide only a variable range. Since many factors change, lobster abundance can defy predictions, creating more distrust. Goldthwait said the system is "automatically out of sync."
Communication is high on Bob Steneck's agenda. He has made a great effort to work with lobstermen in Penobscot Bay, where scientists and fishermen learn from each other and regulations are more easily accepted.
Ultimately scientists, policymakers, managers and fishermen want to protect the resource. Lobstering is one of the last remaining viable fisheries, and the backbone of Maine's coastal fishing culture, Views on how to do this may differ, but no one wants to see a crash in the lobster fishery.

Subject: Commercial fishing; Shellfish; Debates; Regulated industries

Location: Maine

Classification: 4310: Regulation; 9190: United States; 8400: Agriculture industry

Title: Are lobsters overfished?

Publication title: Maine Times; Portland, Me.

Volume: 33

Issue: 5

Pages: 16

Publication year: 2000

Publication date: Jun 08, 2000

Publisher: Maine Times

Place of publication: Portland, Me.

Country of publication: United States, Portland, Me.

Publication subject: Environmental Studies

ISSN: 00250783

Source type: Newspapers

Language of publication: English

Document type: News

ProQuest document ID: 246891060

Document URL: https://search.proquest.com/docview/246891060?accountid=10457

Copyright: Copyright Maine Times Jun 08, 2000

Last updated: 2014-05-17

Database: Global Newsstream

____________________________________________________________

Island crab composters stymied by tighter regulations

Author: Farr, Maureen

Publication info: Maine Times ; Portland, Me. [Portland, Me]28 Oct 1999: 12.

https://search.proquest.com/docview/246882282?accountid=10457

Abstract: None available.

Links: http://CX2EF4JW8J.search.serialssolutions.com/directLink?&amp;atitle=Island+crab+composters+stymied+by+tighter+regulations&amp;author=Farr%2C+Maureen&amp;issn=00250783&amp;title=Maine+Times&amp;volume=32&amp;issue=25&amp;date=1999-10-28&amp;spage=12&amp;id=doi:&amp;sid=ProQ_ss&amp;genre=article

Full text: Q: What happens to all the junk we no longer want?
A: it goes to the dump.
Q: What happens to the smelly, fly-ridden waste from crab picking operations?
A: On Deer Isle, after eight years as the heart of a killer compost, it's going to the dump.
The story of how a successful composting operation ran afoul of state regulations and shut down has no clear, villains. Indeed, all concerned shake their heads as a onetime community resource becomes just another smelly set of plastic bags at the town dump.
It began as two friends wanting to make some good compost for their gardens and gradually grew into the small business that Mike Wood of Deer Isle and Carl Woodward of Stonington have been licensed to run since 1991.
Wood's recipe is simple: Take 1 1/2 tons of crab waste, dump it on the ground, add hardwood sawdust and mix with a bucket loader every week. If you follow this recipe, in six months you will have some fine compost.
Early in the process of securing a license, a DEP investigator visited Woodward's farm, "took soil tests, and said it was a good site," according to Wood. The two also wanted to use another site that was easier to get to yearround. The inspector "looked around, took more samples, and said 'Yep, this could be a site, too.' About two months later, Carl got a letter in the mail saying we were licensed," though in fact the second site had not been formally approved.
Several years ago, the pair began composting on the second site so Woodward, who works full-time raising organic, free-range chickens, could pasture his birds in the back field.
This spring, DEP's Mark King came to inspect their operation and found things weren't so rosy - the site they were using had indeed not been licensed.
In order to continue operations, they were told, they would
have to comply with regulations not in effect eight years
earlier, including installation of a 50-by-50-foot concrete
mixing pad, necessary to keep leachate out of the ground.
Wood said he just shook his head and said it wasn't
possible. Based on the small scale of the operation, King
said a 25-by-25-foot pad would be enough.
The site must be gated so people can't drive in and throw crab shells on the ground - a practice that created not only an eyesore but an odor nuisance for neighbors. And the decomposing pile must be covered by some sort of fabric or by three or four inches of sawdust.
This was mostly a "nuisance issue," King said, because the waste was being dumped on the ground and left untended for days at a time. "The plies were right up next to a road that is basically a driveway to several homes," he said, and under DEP rules compost sites "may not cause an odor nuisance" and "may not pollute the waters of the state of Maine."
DEP doesn't want to close the operation down; the simple solution would be to move the composting back to the original, licensed site. But Woodward wants to pasture his chickens there, so it doesn't makes sense to move.
When King inspected the site earlier this year, it was "a mess," he said - a statement Wood doesn't dispute.
"It's all truthful," Wood said. "People would dump 50 bushels of bad herring on the ground. Usually they'd call and Carl would bury it right away. Sometimes, they never called and there'd be herring floating around the pad and a lot of seagulls having a great time."
"I'd go over on Saturday and spend four or five hours cleaning it up. In the meantime, for those people who had to drive by it on Wednesday, Thursday or Friday it was an eyesore," Wood said.
Was there ever the possibility of fines for using an unlicensed site? King said yes, but he could see Wood was sincere in his efforts and "they just didn't have the time" necessary to run the operation properly.
In trying to help Wood and Woodward, King suggested going back to the Stonington selectmen for assistance in obtaining grants to keep the business going. When they set up the site, the town provided gravel for the pad. In exchange for the gravel, Wood and Woodward agreed to collect the town's crab waste for free, and Wood said he "doesn't want to go to Stonington again and be beholden to them."
Wood said the site license process involved "three or four pages of heavy-duty research, getting copies of the topo[graphic] map, outlining it, getting permission from the abutters, putting notices in the paper - all the hoops you have to jump through to get licensed. And looking at grant applications, it's not worth it. Even if we did all that, in six months DEP could come back and take a look around, see crab shells scattered around and cite us for not doing our job, which would make me a little more anxious."
Wood said it was nice when "no one was on our backs, we were making an OK product and helping out the towns. But [DEP] just upped the ante, which they had to do because that's the law."
Wood, who teaches full-time at Deer Isle-Stonington High School, said, "In our lives, there really was no time to do it properly, no time to fill out all the applications and jump through the hoops. Maybe someone with time can do it. I'm not angry" at DEP, he said. King "was a real nice guy and very helpful. It just was one of those no-win situations.
"Carl and I just looked at each other and said, 'I think this is time to stop.' "
What will happen to Deer Isle's crab waste now that Wood and Woodward have ceased operations?
According to a notice posted by Deer Isle selectmen in Island Advantages, "We are asking to have all crab waste put in heavy plastic bags before putting [it] in the compactor."
While that is a short-term solution, both Wood and King agree the best way to deal with Deer Isle's crab waste is for the towns to take over composting.
They're not alone. Bill Seekins of the Department of Agriculture, a member of the Maine Compost Team, said this is an opportunity for someone to pick up the slack. He agrees it makes sense for towns to compost at transfer stations because the waste is already being dropped off there. "I am very supportive of composting as a solution to managing organic waste," he said.
Seekins suggested requiring that the crab waste be premixed 50/50 with sawdust prior to dumping. The result would be reduced potential for adverse environmental effects and less smell, making it easier for the transfer station operators.
"As a short-term solution, that's what has to happen," he said regarding dumping the crab waste, which will be burned in the Orrington incinerator. "But that's not the best solution in the long run."
Saying that he "doesn't feel good about" the waste being compacted and burned, King said he'd work with the towns - or anyone else who wants to set up a site for composting.
"I've got a pager," he said, "They can call me, and I'll work with them to make it happen."

Subject: Waste disposal; Composting; Environmental regulations; Licensing; Shellfish; Effects

Location: Deer Isle Maine

People: Wood, Mike Woodward, Carl King, Mark

Classification: 8340: Electric, water & gas utilities; 4310: Regulation

Title: Island crab composters stymied by tighter regulations

Publication title: Maine Times; Portland, Me.

Volume: 32

Issue: 25

Pages: 12

Publication year: 1999

Publication date: Oct 28, 1999

Publisher: Maine Times

Place of publication: Portland, Me.

Country of publication: United State s, Portland, Me.

Publication subject: Environmental Studies

ISSN: 00250783

Source type: Newspapers

Language of publication: English

Document type: News

ProQuest document ID: 246882282

Document URL: https://search.proquest.com/docview/246882282?accountid=10457

Copyright: Copyright Maine Times Oct 28, 1999

Last updated: 2012-02-16

Database: Global Newsstream

____________________________________________________________

Gulf of Maine cod closure could pressure Portland next

Author: Austin, Phyllis

Publication info: Maine Times ; Portland, Me. [Portland, Me]07 Jan 1999: 12.

https://search.proquest.com/docview/246916831?accountid=10457

Abstract: To save cod in the Gulf of Maine, federal regulators have rejected angry fishermen's pleas and closed the inshore fishery from the coast of northern Massachusetts to Cape Elizabeth. The emergency three-month closure of the fishery during cod's spring spawning season may herald the total shutdown of the gulf -- a move that would further decimate small boat fishermen.

Links: http://CX2EF4JW8J.search.serialssolutions.com/directLink?&amp;atitle=Gulf+of+Maine+cod+closure+could+pressure+Portland+next&amp;author=Austin%2C+Phyllis&amp;issn=00250783&amp;title=Maine+Times&amp;volume=31&amp;issue=12&amp;date=1999-01-07&amp;spage=12&amp;id=doi:&amp;sid=ProQ_ss&amp;genre=article

Full text:   To save cod in the Gulf of Maine, federal regulators have rejected angry fishermen's pleas and closed the inshore fishery from the coast of northern Massachusetts to Cape Elizabeth. The emergency three-month closure of the fishery during cod's spring spawning season may herald the total shutdown of the gulf -- a move that would further decimate small boat fishermen.
It took nine hours for fishermen to have their say at the New England Fisheries Management-Council meeting Dec. 10 and for council members to debate the options. Some of the 200 or so fishermen contended the scientific data on the dire plight of cod is wrong and the council doesn't know what it's doing. "I really feel they're coming back," said Jim Ford of Newburyport. "If you close the fishery for three months, I can't do it -- pay my mortgage and feed my kids. I make 50 to 60 percent of my living in those months," he said.
But this time fishermen's arguments didn't win the day, and when all was said and done the council vote was 8-5 for the closure, starting in February. It was such an emotional moment that a. few fishermen exploded. One Gloucester man sore at the council and kicked over chairs as he stormed out of the packed Sheraton Colonial Ballroom in Wakefield, Mass: Another fisherman, also from Gloucester, strode up to the table where the council was sitting and called them "evil. You should be ashamed of yourselves," he said.
With the possibility tempers might get out of control, law enforcement officers had been assigned to the meeting. At the end, they took charge, asking the audience to clear the room and make way for a private Christmas party. It was all over but the crying, but the day had been long in coming.
The crash of cod in the gulf was predictable, given the collapse of those stocks, along with haddock and yellowtail Bounder, on Georges Bank in the late 1980s and then in Newfoundland waters in. the early 1990s. Both situations led to the banning of fishing for the species at risk. For the last couple of years, biologists had warned that Gulf of Maine cod, where fishing was still permitted and boats dislocated by the earlier closures soon appeared, was in a free-fall. The New England Fisheries Management Council, trying to please everyone, adopted half-measures, such as a 400-pound limit on daily catches.
But that wasn't enough, and the council's Multispecies Monitoring Committee, a scientific panel that surveys groundfish, recently issued a devastating report confirming that cod stocks had reached an historic low and were still shrinking. The report said fishermen caught more than twice as many Gulf of Maine cod this year as was recommended, and that the 1999 limit should be no more than 782 tons -- compared to the 4,075 tons caught in 1998.
The committee recommended an 80 percent cut in the cod catch, which effectively meant no more cod fishing, given that some are taken inadvertently. Conservationists supported the move, given the disastrous state of affairs in the gulf, and pointed to indications of renewed overfishing for cod on Georges Bank. Petet Shelley of the Conservation Law Foundation said the closure was necessary, although it falls "disproportionately hard on the small boats restricted to coastal waters and older boats" that can't withstand offshore fishing. He hopes the council will move to a "zoning strategy where the fishermen have an interest in making sure all areas are protected and managed" for cod. "We can't manage [the ocean] as a big open space."
Council chairman Joe Brancaleone told fishermen, "We want to get the stock rebuilding and get it rebuilding as soon as possible." He said it's critical to protect the spawning stock or cod will just disappear. But Brancaleone's remarks were challenged by the crowd.
Bill Gerencer of Portland said fisheries management is awful at best "and maybe the process is part of the problem. I have low confidence in science. The landings [statistics] are not accurate," he said.
Paul Cohan of Massachusetts painted out that groundfish boats have 88 legal fishing days for the 1998-99 fishing year. "Until this point, I thought the federal government guaranteed them" because they are in the management plan, he said. It would be a "serious injustice" to take those days away, Cohan argued.
Another fisherman, Joe Orlando, said the three month closure prior to a decision on the 1999-2000 fishing year was "like getting stabbed before you're shot... can't you wait until May 1 to kill us?" That date is the start of the next fishing year, for management purposes.
Brancaleone reminded the fishermen that the total allowable catch for cod has already been exceeded. "It's a moral thing, folks," he said of the closure. The decision was not intended to make fishermen stop fishing altogether, he said. "If there's another alternative where you can fish for something else but cod, you should be doing it. We're not doing this [closure] to be hard on you guys but to protect cod."
In 1994, when Georges Bank was closed to cod, the fishing fleet moved into the Gulf of Maine, increasing pressure on already declining stocks, Fisherman Richard Burgess predicted that the latest move will have a similar domino effect, and that those affected by the closure "will go to Portland, Maine" to fish beyond the reach of the regulations. "The whole fleet is going to Portland where there's plenty of room to tie up. We will go and catch as many fish in an open area. We want to do what we have done for years and years." Paul Vitales of the Gulf of Maine Alliance said, however, that out-of-state vessels won't be welcome in Maine."
Listening to the fishermens' testimony were representatives of the regional congressional delegation. They promised to seek federal financial assistance for fishermen similar to what's provided to farmers. In Canada, $400 million a year has been provided to support devastated families and villages in the maritime provinces.
In one of the most poignant statements about the human impact of ever-tightening restrictions, Angela Sanfilippo, president of the Gloucester Fishermen's Wives, told the council: "We've been a good fishing community. Now we're going co be punished for it. You can't protect [cod] by no fishing."
She said developers "are waiting to buy the waterfront and put up condominiums and luxury hotels, and tourism, will rake [fishings] place. Who will benefit when the fish come back," she questioned. "Who will be the next generation of fishermen? Protect the ocean that God created, but protect the people that God created."
The emergency closure vote came at the end of the council meeting and hours after regulators debated options for dealing with the 1999-2000 fishing year. When it was all over, the council settled on three options for scrutiny by scientists that would include broader closures, further cuts in fishing days and catch limits.
The council scientific group has recommended slashing the catch by closing large areas of the Gulf of Maine for several months at a time, cutting the daily catch limit in half to 200 pounds of cod and reducing the number of each boat's fishing days from 88 to 66.
States affected by the recommendations proposed alternative plans to minimize the effects on their fishermen. Maine's Department of Marine Resources supported different closed areas and extending the inshore closure to eastern Maine, but allowing boats to fish offshore for different species. A third proposal, from Massachusetts and New Hampshire fishermen, called for expanded closures to the north and east as a way to balance the adverse impacts and prevent fishermen from converging on other species and overfishing them.
Tom Orlando cold the council that none of the 10 plans would "achieve anything. We'll be back here tomorrow. Do a trip limit for everybody," he advised. "That way one species won't he sacrificed for another." The council will decide which option to choose at its next meeting later this month.
As the snow drums against the window, the fireplace crackles and the last needles from the Christmas tree are swept away, our thoughts turn to bugs. Lot's of them --headed right this way! So says state insect expert Richard Bradley, who predicts brown-tail moth caterpillars will distress residents in Harpswell, Brunswick, Freeport, Yarmouth and Cumberland this spring. The moths, a nuisance in the Portland area for year can cause a skin rash if touched and respiratory problems if inhaled, Edgecomb already has some bug problems of it's own. Voters have approved $20,000 to rid the town hall of carpenter ants. More money may be allocated in May, if needed.
Maine's congressional delegation and hundreds of homeless are hoping for a new allocation of funds as well. The state lost millions when its homeless programs failed to score well on a Department of Housing and Urban Development test, one of only four states to lose out. Adding insult to injury, the delegation was apparently blindsided by the news, learning about it first on the met.
A more pleasant surprise arrived for Nichole and Shawn Hoague at 12:21 a.m. New Years Day--Maine's first baby of the year. Little Hunter Shaun Hoague was a healthy 8 pounds 9 1/2 ounces. A York couple celebrated Christmas with the first twins adopted through the Maine Adoption Placement Service. Brooklin Elementary, students put a million babies on ice. The seventh and eight graders needed an aquaculture Project and the soft shell clam seedlings at the Beals Island Regional Shellfish Hatchery needed a home for the winter making a perfect match in Salt Pond.
They weren't the only seafood on the move. Tons of lobsters boarded planes, trains and automobiles headed for the Christmas dinner table. Lobster dealers in Maine noted a higher demand than this time last year. It may have had something to do with Jimmy Barnes' hit song "Lobstah for Santa," which encouraged kids to leave lobsters in place of milk and cookies. The song received a lot of airplay on radio stations Downeast last month, where Barnes hails from.
The College of the Atlantic received quite the Christmas gift: two Maine lighthouses. The Island Institute's Maine Lights Program made gifts of stations on Great Duck Island and Mount Desert Rock. Plans are for selected students to live on both islands, studying plant and marine life, arts and literature.
James Kotredes has plenty of time to read. The former Millinocket town manager is spending a month in jail after he admitted to stealing $11,000 from a youth hockey fund he administered. Kotredes resigned as Breer city manager shortly after the charges were filed; Millinocket counselors have authorized an audit of the town's books during the four years Kouedes was at the helm.
The University of Southern Maine has vowed to increase minority students: and employees by 50 percent in the next five years about more students and 18 more staff. The goal is to make USM more reflective of the Portland area -- the city as a minority population of about 14 percent in its schools. "You have to be blind not to see there has been a terrific challenge in the area, said one USM official. You'd have to be deaf not to hear Jane Kennedy at a University of Marine hockey game. Kennedy has lent his pipes to every men's and women's game except two since 1990. He'll announce game number 200 on Saturday.
Westbrook High School Business Manager Frank Amoroso scores points for diplomacy. Recently courted by both Pepsi and Coca-Cola for free scoreboards, Amoroso repeatedly refused the offers -- each company wanted to donate scoreboards on the condition that the other be banished. He eventually got the soda barons to compromise; Coca Cola donated three signs outdoors, Pepsi two indoors.
tish carr became the new director of Community Forestry in the Department of Conservation. And no, that's not a typo -- her favorite poet is e.e. cummings. Dean Mansir's hard work and good memory paid off [Maine Interview 12/10]. The 15-year-old Pittston youth's parents won CMP's Holiday Light Contest after Dean decked their law with angels, Santas and hundreds of lights in an annual display. David and Sherrill Mansir won $1,000 in CMP credit, as did the Southport United Methodist Church, the other grand prize winner. George Mitchell was also honored, winning a British knighthood for his service in Northern Ireland peace talks. He won't be called "sir," however. Only British subjects can carry that honorific.
It's Girl Scout Cookies season, but those hankering sweets sooner are in luck: Oakhurst Dairy's newest ice cream flavor, Black Raspberry Rapture, has exceeded sales projections in only it's fourth month on the market. The flavor is Oakhurst's seventh in the hotly competitive Super Premium market.
Two pooches made the news: Lucy, a black Labrador from Kennebunkport, graced the cover of The Black Dog-Holiday 1998 catalog in her jester outfit. The Martha's Vineyard company sells specialty products and use a dog with a striking resemblance to Lucy as a logo. And Jolie the German pointer is scaring pedestrians in downtown Brunswick. The dog has become locally infamous for sticking its torso out the car window and "singing' to passersby. Owner Betty Williams says Jolie is discriminating, only performing when Williams travels on two particular stretches. She's mum the rest of the time.
1998 ended with the traditional lists of top 10 events of the year. One could not escape looks back at the McGwire-Sosa home run race, President Clinton's impeachment struggles, John Glenn's return to space and the passing of several Hollywood Stars, Frank Sinatra, Shari Lewis and Roy Rogers among them. On the state level, the Bowater mill in Millinocket was put on the market, northern Maine forest land changed hands, gay rights were repealed, MTBE surfaced in wells, Gov. Angus King was re-elected, Phish, as well as new industry, rocked the Loring Commerce Center, hundreds were laid off from mill jobs in Bridgton and Rumford, others took jobs installing: the new natural gas pipeline, more Rite Aids and new Wal-Mart Supercenters doffed the landscape and of course, the Ice Storm of '98 left thousands without electricity, heat and showers. Personally, I would rank my June nuptials among the top events of the year. But like the Ice Storm, I hope nothing that frenzied, treacherous, immobilizing and momentous ever strikes again.
Happy New Year.

Subject: Commercial fishing; Shutdowns; Fisheries; Meetings

Location: Portland ME US New England

Title: Gulf of Maine cod closure could pressure Portland next

Publication title: Maine Times; Portland, Me.

Volume: 31

Issue: 12

Pages: 12

Number of pages: 0

Publication year: 1999

Publication date: Jan 07, 1999

Publisher: Maine Times

Place of publication: Portland, Me.

Country of publication: United States, Portland, Me.

Publication subject: Environmental Studies

ISSN: 00250783

Source type: Newspapers

Language of publication: English

Document type: NEWSPAPER

Accession number: 99-89616

ProQuest document ID: 246916831

Document URL: https://search.proquest.com/docview/246916831?accountid=10457

Copyright: Copyright Maine Times Jan 07, 1999

Last updated: 2014-05-21

Database: Global Newsstream

____________________________________________________________

Gulf of Maine cod closure could pressure Portland next

Author: Austin, Phyllis

Publication info: Maine Times ; Portland, Me. [Portland, Me]07 Jan 1999: 12. [Duplicate]

https://search.proquest.com/docview/246857024?accountid=10457

Abstract: To save cod in the Gulf of Maine, federal regulators have rejected angry fishermen's pleas and closed the inshore fishery from the coast of northern Massachusetts to Cape Elizabeth. The emergency three-month closure of the fishery during cod's spring spawning season may herald the total shutdown of the gulf -- a move that would further decimate small boat fishermen.

Links: http://CX2EF4JW8J.search.serialssolutions.com/directLink?&amp;atitle=Gulf+of+Maine+cod+closure+could+pressure+Portland+next&amp;author=Austin%2C+Phyllis&amp;issn=00250783&amp;title=Maine+Times&amp;volume=31&amp;issue=12&amp;date=1999-01-07&amp;spage=12&amp;id=doi:&amp;sid=ProQ_ss&amp;genre=article

Full text: To save cod in the Gulf of Maine, federal regulators have rejected angry fishermen's pleas and closed the inshore fishery from the coast of northern Massachusetts to Cape Elizabeth. The emergency three-month closure of the fishery during cod's spring spawning season may herald the total shutdown of the gulf -- a move that would further decimate small boat fishermen.
It took nine hours for fishermen to have their say at the New England Fisheries Management-Council meeting Dec. 10 and for council members to debate the options. Some of the 200 or so fishermen contended the scientific data on the dire plight of cod is wrong and the council doesn't know what it's doing. "I really feel they're coming back," said Jim Ford of Newburyport. "If you close the fishery for three months, I can't do it -- pay my mortgage and feed my kids. I make 50 to 60 percent of my living in those months," he said.
But this time fishermen's arguments didn't win the day, and when all was said and done the council vote was 8-5 for the closure, starting in February. It was such an emotional moment that a. few fishermen exploded. One Gloucester man sore at the council and kicked over chairs as he stormed out of the packed Sheraton Colonial Ballroom in Wakefield, Mass: Another fisherman, also from Gloucester, strode up to the table where the council was sitting and called them "evil. You should be ashamed of yourselves," he said.
With the possibility tempers might get out of control, law enforcement officers had been assigned to the meeting. At the end, they took charge, asking the audience to clear the room and make way for a private Christmas party. It was all over but the crying, but the day had been long in coming.
The crash of cod in the gulf was predictable, given the collapse of those stocks, along with haddock and yellowtail Bounder, on Georges Bank in the late 1980s and then in Newfoundland waters in. the early 1990s. Both situations led to the banning of fishing for the species at risk. For the last couple of years, biologists had warned that Gulf of Maine cod, where fishing was still permitted and boats dislocated by the earlier closures soon appeared, was in a free-fall. The New England Fisheries Management Council, trying to please everyone, adopted half-measures, such as a 400-pound limit on daily catches.
But that wasn't enough, and the council's Multispecies Monitoring Committee, a scientific panel that surveys groundfish, recently issued a devastating report confirming that cod stocks had reached an historic low and were still shrinking. The report said fishermen caught more than twice as many Gulf of Maine cod this year as was recommended, and that the 1999 limit should be no more than 782 tons -- compared to the 4,075 tons caught in 1998.
The committee recommended an 80 percent cut in the cod catch, which effectively meant no more cod fishing, given that some are taken inadvertently. Conservationists supported the move, given the disastrous state of affairs in the gulf, and pointed to indications of renewed overfishing for cod on Georges Bank. Petet Shelley of the Conservation Law Foundation said the closure was necessary, although it falls "disproportionately hard on the small boats restricted to coastal waters and older boats" that can't withstand offshore fishing. He hopes the council will move to a "zoning strategy where the fishermen have an interest in making sure all areas are protected and managed" for cod. "We can't manage [the ocean] as a big open space."
Council chairman Joe Brancaleone told fishermen, "We want to get the stock rebuilding and get it rebuilding as soon as possible." He said it's critical to protect the spawning stock or cod will just disappear. But Brancaleone's remarks were challenged by the crowd.
Bill Gerencer of Portland said fisheries management is awful at best "and maybe the process is part of the problem. I have low confidence in science. The landings [statistics] are not accurate," he said.
Paul Cohan of Massachusetts painted out that groundfish boats have 88 legal fishing days for the 1998-99 fishing year. "Until this point, I thought the federal government guaranteed them" because they are in the management plan, he said. It would be a "serious injustice" to take those days away, Cohan argued.
Another fisherman, Joe Orlando, said the three month closure prior to a decision on the 1999-2000 fishing year was "like getting stabbed before you're shot... can't you wait until May 1 to kill us?" That date is the start of the next fishing year, for management purposes.
Brancaleone reminded the fishermen that the total allowable catch for cod has already been exceeded. "It's a moral thing, folks," he said of the closure. The decision was not intended to make fishermen stop fishing altogether, he said. "If there's another alternative where you can fish for something else but cod, you should be doing it. We're not doing this [closure] to be hard on you guys but to protect cod."
In 1994, when Georges Bank was closed to cod, the fishing fleet moved into the Gulf of Maine, increasing pressure on already declining stocks, Fisherman Richard Burgess predicted that the latest move will have a similar domino effect, and that those affected by the closure "will go to Portland, Maine" to fish beyond the reach of the regulations. "The whole fleet is going to Portland where there's plenty of room to tie up. We will go and catch as many fish in an open area. We want to do what we have done for years and years." Paul Vitales of the Gulf of Maine Alliance said, however, that out-of-state vessels won't be welcome in Maine."
Listening to the fishermens' testimony were representatives of the regional congressional delegation. They promised to seek federal financial assistance for fishermen similar to what's provided to farmers. In Canada, $400 million a year has been provided to support devastated families and villages in the maritime provinces.
In one of the most poignant statements about the human impact of ever-tightening restrictions, Angela Sanfilippo, president of the Gloucester Fishermen's Wives, told the council: "We've been a good fishing community. Now we're going co be punished for it. You can't protect [cod] by no fishing."
She said developers "are waiting to buy the waterfront and put up condominiums and luxury hotels, and tourism, will rake [fishings] place. Who will benefit when the fish come back," she questioned. "Who will be the next generation of fishermen? Protect the ocean that God created, but protect the people that God created."
The emergency closure vote came at the end of the council meeting and hours after regulators debated options for dealing with the 1999-2000 fishing year. When it was all over, the council settled on three options for scrutiny by scientists that would include broader closures, further cuts in fishing days and catch limits.
The council scientific group has recommended slashing the catch by closing large areas of the Gulf of Maine for several months at a time, cutting the daily catch limit in half to 200 pounds of cod and reducing the number of each boat's fishing days from 88 to 66.
States affected by the recommendations proposed alternative plans to minimize the effects on their fishermen. Maine's Department of Marine Resources supported different closed areas and extending the inshore closure to eastern Maine, but allowing boats to fish offshore for different species. A third proposal, from Massachusetts and New Hampshire fishermen, called for expanded closures to the north and east as a way to balance the adverse impacts and prevent fishermen from converging on other species and overfishing them.
Tom Orlando cold the council that none of the 10 plans would "achieve anything. We'll be back here tomorrow. Do a trip limit for everybody," he advised. "That way one species won't he sacrificed for another." The council will decide which option to choose at its next meeting later this month.
As the snow drums against the window, the fireplace crackles and the last needles from the Christmas tree are swept away, our thoughts turn to bugs. Lot's of them --headed right this way! So says state insect expert Richard Bradley, who predicts brown-tail moth caterpillars will distress residents in Harpswell, Brunswick, Freeport, Yarmouth and Cumberland this spring. The moths, a nuisance in the Portland area for year can cause a skin rash if touched and respiratory problems if inhaled, Edgecomb already has some bug problems of it's own. Voters have approved $20,000 to rid the town hall of carpenter ants. More money may be allocated in May, if needed.
Maine's congressional delegation and hundreds of homeless are hoping for a new allocation of funds as well. The state lost millions when its homeless programs failed to score well on a Department of Housing and Urban Development test, one of only four states to lose out. Adding insult to injury, the delegation was apparently blindsided by the news, learning about it first on the met.
A more pleasant surprise arrived for Nichole and Shawn Hoague at 12:21 a.m. New Years Day--Maine's first baby of the year. Little Hunter Shaun Hoague was a healthy 8 pounds 9 1/2 ounces. A York couple celebrated Christmas with the first twins adopted through the Maine Adoption Placement Service. Brooklin Elementary, students put a million babies on ice. The seventh and eight graders needed an aquaculture Project and the soft shell clam seedlings at the Beals Island Regional Shellfish Hatchery needed a home for the winter making a perfect match in Salt Pond.
They weren't the only seafood on the move. Tons of lobsters boarded planes, trains and automobiles headed for the Christmas dinner table. Lobster dealers in Maine noted a higher demand than this time last year. It may have had something to do with Jimmy Barnes' hit song "Lobstah for Santa," which encouraged kids to leave lobsters in place of milk and cookies. The song received a lot of airplay on radio stations Downeast last month, where Barnes hails from.
The College of the Atlantic received quite the Christmas gift: two Maine lighthouses. The Island Institute's Maine Lights Program made gifts of stations on Great Duck Island and Mount Desert Rock. Plans are for selected students to live on both islands, studying plant and marine life, arts and literature.
James Kotredes has plenty of time to read. The former Millinocket town manager is spending a month in jail after he admitted to stealing $11,000 from a youth hockey fund he administered. Kotredes resigned as Breer city manager shortly after the charges were filed; Millinocket counselors have authorized an audit of the town's books during the four years Kouedes was at the helm.
The University of Southern Maine has vowed to increase minority students: and employees by 50 percent in the next five years about more students and 18 more staff. The goal is to make USM more reflective of the Portland area -- the city as a minority population of about 14 percent in its schools. "You have to be blind not to see there has been a terrific challenge in the area, said one USM official. You'd have to be deaf not to hear Jane Kennedy at a University of Marine hockey game. Kennedy has lent his pipes to every men's and women's game except two since 1990. He'll announce game number 200 on Saturday.
Westbrook High School Business Manager Frank Amoroso scores points for diplomacy. Recently courted by both Pepsi and Coca-Cola for free scoreboards, Amoroso repeatedly refused the offers -- each company wanted to donate scoreboards on the condition that the other be banished. He eventually got the soda barons to compromise; Coca Cola donated three signs outdoors, Pepsi two indoors.
tish carr became the new director of Community Forestry in the Department of Conservation. And no, that's not a typo -- her favorite poet is e.e. cummings. Dean Mansir's hard work and good memory paid off [Maine Interview 12/10]. The 15-year-old Pittston youth's parents won CMP's Holiday Light Contest after Dean decked their law with angels, Santas and hundreds of lights in an annual display. David and Sherrill Mansir won $1,000 in CMP credit, as did the Southport United Methodist Church, the other grand prize winner. George Mitchell was also honored, winning a British knighthood for his service in Northern Ireland peace talks. He won't be called "sir," however. Only British subjects can carry that honorific.
It's Girl Scout Cookies season, but those hankering sweets sooner are in luck: Oakhurst Dairy's newest ice cream flavor, Black Raspberry Rapture, has exceeded sales projections in only it's fourth month on the market. The flavor is Oakhurst's seventh in the hotly competitive Super Premium market.
Two pooches made the news: Lucy, a black Labrador from Kennebunkport, graced the cover of The Black Dog-Holiday 1998 catalog in her jester outfit. The Martha's Vineyard company sells specialty products and use a dog with a striking resemblance to Lucy as a logo. And Jolie the German pointer is scaring pedestrians in downtown Brunswick. The dog has become locally infamous for sticking its torso out the car window and "singing' to passersby. Owner Betty Williams says Jolie is discriminating, only performing when Williams travels on two particular stretches. She's mum the rest of the time.
1998 ended with the traditional lists of top 10 events of the year. One could not escape looks back at the McGwire-Sosa home run race, President Clinton's impeachment struggles, John Glenn's return to space and the passing of several Hollywood Stars, Frank Sinatra, Shari Lewis and Roy Rogers among them. On the state level, the Bowater mill in Millinocket was put on the market, northern Maine forest land changed hands, gay rights were repealed, MTBE surfaced in wells, Gov. Angus King was re-elected, Phish, as well as new industry, rocked the Loring Commerce Center, hundreds were laid off from mill jobs in Bridgton and Rumford, others took jobs installing: the new natural gas pipeline, more Rite Aids and new Wal-Mart Supercenters doffed the landscape and of course, the Ice Storm of '98 left thousands without electricity, heat and showers. Personally, I would rank my June nuptials among the top events of the year. But like the Ice Storm, I hope nothing that frenzied, treacherous, immobilizing and momentous ever strikes again.
Happy New Year.

Subject: Commercial fishing; Shutdowns; Fisheries; Meetings

Location: Portland ME US New England

Title: Gulf of Maine cod closure could pressure Portland next

Publication title: Maine Times; Portland, Me.

Volume: 31

Issue: 12

Pages: 12

Number of pages: 0

Publication year: 1999

Publication date: Jan 07, 1999

Publisher: Maine Times

Place of publication: Portland, Me.

Country of publication: United States, Portland, Me.

Publication subject: Environmental Studies

ISSN: 00250783

Source type: Newspapers

Language of publication: English

Document type: NEWSPAPER

Accession number: 99-89616

ProQuest document ID: 246857024

Document URL: https://search.proquest.com/docview/246857024?accountid=10457

Copyright: Copyright Maine Times Jan 07, 1999

Last updated: 2011-12-14

Database: Global Newsstream

____________________________________________________________

Who will regulate hog farms?

Author: Chutchian, Kenneth Z

Publication info: Maine Times ; Portland, Me. [Portland, Me]02 July 1998: 8.

https://search.proquest.com/docview/246888778?accountid=10457

Abstract: GARY PELLETIER DOESN'T LIKE the sound of government regulation. He lives, after all, in T17 R5 [near Cross Lake and Fort Kent], which has no local government. But compared to the smells and potential environmental impact of large-scale hog farms that have been proposed in Aroostook County, a little more government oversight feels pretty good to the retired game warden.

Links: http://CX2EF4JW8J.search.serialssolutions.com/directLink?&amp;atitle=Who+will+regulate+hog+farms%3F&amp;author=Chutchian%2C+Kenneth+Z&amp;issn=00250783&amp;title=Maine+Times&amp;volume=30&amp;issue=37&amp;date=1998-07-02&amp;spage=8&amp;id=doi:&amp;sid=ProQ_ss&amp;genre=article

Full text:   GARY PELLETIER DOESN'T LIKE the sound of government regulation. He lives, after all, in T17 R5 [near Cross Lake and Fort Kent], which has no local government. But compared to the smells and potential environmental impact of large-scale hog farms that have been proposed in Aroostook County, a little more government oversight feels pretty good to the retired game warden.
"We have no laws protecting us from a company coming in and ruining our groundwater," said Pelletier. "That leaves us with nothing on in a cold breeze on a cold day." Pelletier and many others who have battled hog farm projects in The County are anxiously following state government regulators as they put some meat onto a new livestock farming law passed by the Legislature last spring.
The most immediate impact of the law is a one-year, statewide moratorium on the development of farms with more than 1,000 livestock animals. The long-term impact, however, will begin to evolve over the next few months, as four different state government agencies work out parameters of nutrient management requirements for future livestock operations.
The original intent of the law as to protect Aroostook County from the fate of rural states that have allowed industrial hog farms to proliferate -and pollute. Simply put, hogs produce a lot of waste; some studies say the average pig produces two to three times as much waste as the average human. Managing that waste has been a problem in states where industrial farms with 3,000 to 10,000 pigs have developed. The most glaring example of this trend occurred in North Carolina, where the number of hogs increased from 2 million to 10 million in the early 1990s. Five major sewage spills from the hog farms in 1995 and 1996 killed more than 10 million fish, close nearly 365,000 acres of coastal wetlands to shellfish harvesting and interrupted commercial fishing.
North Carolina's troubles were featured on "60 Minutes"; industrial hog farm supporters still blame that show for the negative reactions that proposals for new farms encounter elsewhere.
But Maine opponents of pig farms may have been influenced by more than a 15-minute spot on a single television show. They could have been at first intimidated and then galvanized by a large Canadian corporation, NAP Breton of Notre Dame du Lac and St. George de Beauce, Quebec, that floated proposals in several Aroostook County communities, including Cross Lake, Limestone and New Sweden.
Opponents may also have been influenced by watching developments in Caswell, just a few miles from the Canadian border--a town that is helpless against the impact of a farm development in nearby Grand Falls, New Brunswick. And they may have been frightened to learn that the Maine Land Use Regulation Commission, which serves as the de facto zoning board for unorganized territories, has virtually no power to regulate hog farms. LURC's jurisdiction does not extend to agricultural or logging operations, according to state law. John Williams, director of LURC, does not yet know how state government will eventually regulate hog farms. Nor does Peter Mosher, director of agricultural, natural and rural resources at the Maine Department of Agriculture, or Todd Burrowes of the State Planning Office, or anyone at the Department of Environmental Protection. Williams, Mosher and Burrows are involved in a task force that has a Dec. 15 deadline for drafting nutrient management rules that will eventually be voted on by the state Legislature. The nutrient plan, according to the law that created the task force, is supposed to address how farm nutrients, including manure and commercial fertilizers, will be stored and applied, along with steps to protect groundwater.
Gary Pelletier, who was instrumental in the community opposition that forced Breton to back off from its proposal in Cross Lake, would like to see LURC carry the ball on hog farm oversight.
"I'd rather see LURC do it," Pelletier said. "The Department of Agriculture does not have a good track record on these issues." State Sen. Judy Paradis [D-Frenchville], who authored the legislation that led to the farm nutrient bill, also favors LURC oversight. Paradis and Pelletier believe LURC will have more autonomy in handling problems created by the farms. Paradis notes that LURC already has a reputation for heavy-handed regulation, and that she would appreciate the agency putting that reputation into constructive use. "It's totally disingenuous for them to regulate every little sewer and not be able to deal with this," Paradis said of LURC.
But Williams points out, "By stature, we don't regulate agricultural activities. If the project is in a protection or development zone, we would [regulate]." At a recent informational meeting LURC held on hog farming in Fort Kent, Williams noted, farmers seemed to favor state oversight coming from the Department of Agriculture. Local residents determined to stop hog farm development appeared to favor LURC oversight, Williams said.
Mosher, the point man on hog farm issues for the Department of Agriculture, said there is some merit to the arguments in favor of large hog farms. Manure, after all, is about as organic a farm fertilizer as you can get. And Aroostook County probably has more undeveloped land on which to spread pig manure than any region east of the Mississippi River.
"Manure spread on crop grounds benefits the ground and the crops," Mosher said. "If I were a [crop] farmer, I'd want to be teamed up with a hog farmer.
There's plenty of land ... plenty of benefit from the organic matter ... and there's a market for the grains consumed by the hogs. It can be synergistic."
Jeff Armstrong of Armstrong Engineering in Caribou was working with potato farmer Gilles Michaud of Limestone to expand his operation into an industrial hog facility before the state moratorium went into effect; Michaud's project is now on hold. Armstrong says the soil in much of Aroostook County could benefit from the spreading of pig manure; over the last 15 years, he said, the percentage of organic material in the county's farm soil has declined from 8 percent to less than 1 percent. The decline in organics leads to erosion, which lowers the soil's ability to absorb moisture. Even though the state moratorium and local backlash forced the Breton company to back off from its explorations into hog farming in Aroostook county, the company's inquiries will have a profound effect on the way state regulators approach new rules.
"One of our concerns is that Breton could meet any standard we create," Mosher said. "Then we may be setting standards that are too high for our own farmers."
Warren Grass, vice president of the Maine Hog Growers Association, said his organization is opposed to the state moratorium on large livestock farms. In order for small hog farm operations to survive, Grass said, the state needs the "infrastructure" that large hog breeders would provide. State officials currently estimate the number of pigs in all of Maine to be around 4,000 to 5,000--roughly the size of a typical industrial hog factory in North Carolina, Wisconsin, Kansas and other farm states. Mosher of the Department of Agriculture sad the biggest hog farms in Maine probably house about 200 pigs.
The folks of Aroostook County who fear that their beloved; largely unregulated landscape is vulnerable to an invasion of pig factories are also skeptical of government's ability to protect them. It will be many months before the nutrient management task force, which includes farmers, public representatives and state officials, produces concrete proposals. It could take longer to determine the extent of involvement by LURC or the state agriculture department, or the DEP.
That leaves matters in the hands of local communities, which is where Mainers traditionally like to deal with issues of individual freedom versus overall public benefit. The population of Cross Lake is only 400 to 500 year-round, yet Gary Pelletier last year managed to collect 1,400 signatures on a petition opposing the Breton hog farm.
When town officials in New Sweden learned about Breton's plan for their community, they did some research and learned, as selectman Charles Huntoon put it, "You can't just say you don't want a hog farm." So New Sweden passed a six-month moratorium on all industrial and commercial construction while planners worked on an economic development ordinance; that moratorium will likely be extended, according to Huntoon.
The communities of New Sweden, Westmanland, Caribou, Limestone, Stockholm and Cross Lake are acting on their own--through vocal opposition or local ordinances--to keep industrial hog farming from changing the nature of Aroostook County. They are hoping for state government protection, but they're not counting on it. In addition to good old-fashioned Yankee stubbornness, they have another weapon in their arsenal--the Internet.
Charles Huntoon says he generally avoids newspapers ("I don't want to be unduly influenced, and we always seem to be making the papers for some Peason or another"), but he knows his way around the Web. His computer recently led him to information about large hog farms in Australia with enclosed systems that recycle manure and wastewater and which use methane gas from manure for electric energy. "It's not impossible to have an operation like that," Huntoon said. He's tired of hearing about all the available land in Aroostook County that can be used to spread pig manure.
"That's what they keep telling everybody," Huntoon said. "It doesn't matter where you put it [on open fields], it stinks."

Subject: Livestock industry; Hogs; State regulation; Moratoriums

Location: Hallowell ME US New England

Title: Who will regulate hog farms?

Publication title: Maine Times; Portland, Me.

Volume: 30

Issue: 37

Pages: 8

Number of pages: 0

Publication year: 1998

Publication date: Jul 02, 1998

Publisher: Maine Times

Place of publication: Portland, Me.

Country of publication: United States, Portland, Me.

Publication subject: Environmental Studies

ISSN: 00250783

Source type: Newspapers

Language of publication: English

Document type: NEWSPAPER

Accession number: 99-19080

ProQuest document ID: 246888778

Document URL: https://search.proquest.com/docview/246888778?accountid=10457

Copyright: Copyright Maine Times Jul 02, 1998

Last updated: 2014-05-18

Database: Global Newsstream

____________________________________________________________

Who will regulate hog farms?

Author: Chutchian, Kenneth Z

Publication info: Maine Times ; Portland, Me. [Portland, Me]02 July 1998: 8. [Duplicate]

https://search.proquest.com/docview/246881680?accountid=10457

Abstract: GARY PELLETIER DOESN'T LIKE the sound of government regulation. He lives, after all, in T17 R5 [near Cross Lake and Fort Kent], which has no local government. But compared to the smells and potential environmental impact of large-scale hog farms that have been proposed in Aroostook County, a little more government oversight feels pretty good to the retired game warden.

Links: http://CX2EF4JW8J.search.serialssolutions.com/directLink?&amp;atitle=Who+will+regulate+hog+farms%3F&amp;author=Chutchian%2C+Kenneth+Z&amp;issn=00250783&amp;title=Maine+Times&amp;volume=30&amp;issue=37&amp;date=1998-07-02&amp;spage=8&amp;id=doi:&amp;sid=ProQ_ss&amp;genre=article

Full text: GARY PELLETIER DOESN'T LIKE the sound of government regulation. He lives, after all, in T17 R5 [near Cross Lake and Fort Kent], which has no local government. But compared to the smells and potential environmental impact of large-scale hog farms that have been proposed in Aroostook County, a little more government oversight feels pretty good to the retired game warden.
"We have no laws protecting us from a company coming in and ruining our groundwater," said Pelletier. "That leaves us with nothing on in a cold breeze on a cold day." Pelletier and many others who have battled hog farm projects in The County are anxiously following state government regulators as they put some meat onto a new livestock farming law passed by the Legislature last spring.
The most immediate impact of the law is a one-year, statewide moratorium on the development of farms with more than 1,000 livestock animals. The long-term impact, however, will begin to evolve over the next few months, as four different state government agencies work out parameters of nutrient management requirements for future livestock operations.
The original intent of the law as to protect Aroostook County from the fate of rural states that have allowed industrial hog farms to proliferate -and pollute. Simply put, hogs produce a lot of waste; some studies say the average pig produces two to three times as much waste as the average human. Managing that waste has been a problem in states where industrial farms with 3,000 to 10,000 pigs have developed. The most glaring example of this trend occurred in North Carolina, where the number of hogs increased from 2 million to 10 million in the early 1990s. Five major sewage spills from the hog farms in 1995 and 1996 killed more than 10 million fish, close nearly 365,000 acres of coastal wetlands to shellfish harvesting and interrupted commercial fishing.
North Carolina's troubles were featured on "60 Minutes"; industrial hog farm supporters still blame that show for the negative reactions that proposals for new farms encounter elsewhere.
But Maine opponents of pig farms may have been influenced by more than a 15-minute spot on a single television show. They could have been at first intimidated and then galvanized by a large Canadian corporation, NAP Breton of Notre Dame du Lac and St. George de Beauce, Quebec, that floated proposals in several Aroostook County communities, including Cross Lake, Limestone and New Sweden.
Opponents may also have been influenced by watching developments in Caswell, just a few miles from the Canadian border--a town that is helpless against the impact of a farm development in nearby Grand Falls, New Brunswick. And they may have been frightened to learn that the Maine Land Use Regulation Commission, which serves as the de facto zoning board for unorganized territories, has virtually no power to regulate hog farms. LURC's jurisdiction does not extend to agricultural or logging operations, according to state law. John Williams, director of LURC, does not yet know how state government will eventually regulate hog farms. Nor does Peter Mosher, director of agricultural, natural and rural resources at the Maine Department of Agriculture, or Todd Burrowes of the State Planning Office, or anyone at the Department of Environmental Protection. Williams, Mosher and Burrows are involved in a task force that has a Dec. 15 deadline for drafting nutrient management rules that will eventually be voted on by the state Legislature. The nutrient plan, according to the law that created the task force, is supposed to address how farm nutrients, including manure and commercial fertilizers, will be stored and applied, along with steps to protect groundwater.
Gary Pelletier, who was instrumental in the community opposition that forced Breton to back off from its proposal in Cross Lake, would like to see LURC carry the ball on hog farm oversight.
"I'd rather see LURC do it," Pelletier said. "The Department of Agriculture does not have a good track record on these issues." State Sen. Judy Paradis [D-Frenchville], who authored the legislation that led to the farm nutrient bill, also favors LURC oversight. Paradis and Pelletier believe LURC will have more autonomy in handling problems created by the farms. Paradis notes that LURC already has a reputation for heavy-handed regulation, and that she would appreciate the agency putting that reputation into constructive use. "It's totally disingenuous for them to regulate every little sewer and not be able to deal with this," Paradis said of LURC.
But Williams points out, "By stature, we don't regulate agricultural activities. If the project is in a protection or development zone, we would [regulate]." At a recent informational meeting LURC held on hog farming in Fort Kent, Williams noted, farmers seemed to favor state oversight coming from the Department of Agriculture. Local residents determined to stop hog farm development appeared to favor LURC oversight, Williams said.
Mosher, the point man on hog farm issues for the Department of Agriculture, said there is some merit to the arguments in favor of large hog farms. Manure, after all, is about as organic a farm fertilizer as you can get. And Aroostook County probably has more undeveloped land on which to spread pig manure than any region east of the Mississippi River.
"Manure spread on crop grounds benefits the ground and the crops," Mosher said. "If I were a [crop] farmer, I'd want to be teamed up with a hog farmer.
There's plenty of land ... plenty of benefit from the organic matter ... and there's a market for the grains consumed by the hogs. It can be synergistic."
Jeff Armstrong of Armstrong Engineering in Caribou was working with potato farmer Gilles Michaud of Limestone to expand his operation into an industrial hog facility before the state moratorium went into effect; Michaud's project is now on hold. Armstrong says the soil in much of Aroostook County could benefit from the spreading of pig manure; over the last 15 years, he said, the percentage of organic material in the county's farm soil has declined from 8 percent to less than 1 percent. The decline in organics leads to erosion, which lowers the soil's ability to absorb moisture. Even though the state moratorium and local backlash forced the Breton company to back off from its explorations into hog farming in Aroostook county, the company's inquiries will have a profound effect on the way state regulators approach new rules.
"One of our concerns is that Breton could meet any standard we create," Mosher said. "Then we may be setting standards that are too high for our own farmers."
Warren Grass, vice president of the Maine Hog Growers Association, said his organization is opposed to the state moratorium on large livestock farms. In order for small hog farm operations to survive, Grass said, the state needs the "infrastructure" that large hog breeders would provide. State officials currently estimate the number of pigs in all of Maine to be around 4,000 to 5,000--roughly the size of a typical industrial hog factory in North Carolina, Wisconsin, Kansas and other farm states. Mosher of the Department of Agriculture sad the biggest hog farms in Maine probably house about 200 pigs.
The folks of Aroostook County who fear that their beloved; largely unregulated landscape is vulnerable to an invasion of pig factories are also skeptical of government's ability to protect them. It will be many months before the nutrient management task force, which includes farmers, public representatives and state officials, produces concrete proposals. It could take longer to determine the extent of involvement by LURC or the state agriculture department, or the DEP.
That leaves matters in the hands of local communities, which is where Mainers traditionally like to deal with issues of individual freedom versus overall public benefit. The population of Cross Lake is only 400 to 500 year-round, yet Gary Pelletier last year managed to collect 1,400 signatures on a petition opposing the Breton hog farm.
When town officials in New Sweden learned about Breton's plan for their community, they did some research and learned, as selectman Charles Huntoon put it, "You can't just say you don't want a hog farm." So New Sweden passed a six-month moratorium on all industrial and commercial construction while planners worked on an economic development ordinance; that moratorium will likely be extended, according to Huntoon.
The communities of New Sweden, Westmanland, Caribou, Limestone, Stockholm and Cross Lake are acting on their own--through vocal opposition or local ordinances--to keep industrial hog farming from changing the nature of Aroostook County. They are hoping for state government protection, but they're not counting on it. In addition to good old-fashioned Yankee stubbornness, they have another weapon in their arsenal--the Internet.
Charles Huntoon says he generally avoids newspapers ("I don't want to be unduly influenced, and we always seem to be making the papers for some Peason or another"), but he knows his way around the Web. His computer recently led him to information about large hog farms in Australia with enclosed systems that recycle manure and wastewater and which use methane gas from manure for electric energy. "It's not impossible to have an operation like that," Huntoon said. He's tired of hearing about all the available land in Aroostook County that can be used to spread pig manure.
"That's what they keep telling everybody," Huntoon said. "It doesn't matter where you put it [on open fields], it stinks."

Subject: Livestock industry; Hogs; State regulation; Moratoriums

Location: Hallowell ME US New England

Title: Who will regulate hog farms?

Publication title: Maine Times; Portland, Me.

Volume: 30

Issue: 37

Pages: 8

Number of pages: 0

Publication year: 1998

Publication date: Jul 02, 1998

Publisher: Maine Times

Place of publication: Portland, Me.

Country of publication: United States, Portland, Me.

Publication subject: Environmental Studies

ISSN: 00250783

Source type: Newspapers

Language of publication: English

Document type: NEWSPAPER

Accession number: 99-19080

ProQuest document ID: 246881680

Document URL: https://search.proquest.com/docview/246881680?accountid=10457

Copyright: Copyright Maine Times Jul 02, 1998

Last updated: 2011-12-01

Database: Global Newsstream

____________________________________________________________

Sam can cook: If all the kitchen's a stage, then he's the leading player

Author: Beem, Edgar Allen

Publication info: Maine Times ; Portland, Me. [Portland, Me]19 Mar 1998: 4.

https://search.proquest.com/docview/246914931?accountid=10457

Abstract: "AT ITS ROOT, ANY CIVILIZATION is organized around the production and procurement of food," Sam Hayward tells a ass of sleepy Scarborough High School students."

Links: http://CX2EF4JW8J.search.serialssolutions.com/directLink?&amp;atitle=Sam+can+cook%3A+If+all+the+kitchen%27s+a+stage%2C+then+he%27s+the+leading+player&amp;author=Beem%2C+Edgar+Allen&amp;issn=00250783&amp;title=Maine+Times&amp;volume=30&amp;issue=22&amp;date=1998-03-19&amp;spage=4&amp;id=doi:&amp;sid=ProQ_ss&amp;genre=article

Full text:   "AT ITS ROOT, ANY CIVILIZATION is organized around the production and procurement of food," Sam Hayward tells a ass of sleepy Scarborough High School students."
Hayward, 49, professorial in glasses, mustache and tweed sport coat, then proceeds to wake up the teens with a late breakfast consisting of duck comfit, a gruel of wheat, peas, lentils, celery root, parsnip, turnip, fennel, onions and salt cod, and a dollop of mango sorbet.
Hayward, chef-proprietor of Fore Street restaurant in Portland and one of the best cooks in Maine, is guest teaching a history class, providing a capsule account of the impact of food on history -- Columbus was looking for a new spice route to India when he ran into North America, remember -- and passing out samples of foods eaten in France before the Crusades.
Hayward spends the morning teaching four classes at Scarborough High, then, late the same afternoon, conducts yet a fifth "class," instructing the servers at Fore Street in the finer points of the evening's newly minted menu. The spring-run shad roe, he explains, is granular in texture and looks like a sausage. It will be served as an appetizer with a light mayonnaise, capers and chives. And, oh yes, the Pemaquid oyster supplier damaged his drag, so the oysters tonight are from Sakonnet Point, Rhode Island.
Fore Street is located in a low, one-story brick building at 288 Fore St., not far from the Customs House. Its bank of high windows gives diners a panoramic view of Portland's waterfront and the Casco Bay Lines terminal, but the building itself is as unprepossessing as the car garage it once was. A wood shed attached to one side of the building adds to its raw, utilitarian look. Since it opened in June 1996, however, Fore Street has been one of Portland's hottest restaurants -- the place to eat if you can find it (the small sign offers little help) and if you can get in. By the time Hayward concludes his parsing of the evening's menu, the lobby and bar are already full with the first wave of diners waiting to be seated -- on a weeknight in dreary March.
Over the past 20 years, dining has become a form of entertainment in Maine, not just an occasion for a fancy meal but a kind of social theater. At Fore Street, the theatricality of dining is accentuated by the open kitchen. The dining room is dominated by wood-fired ovens and flaming grills. Servers in white shirts, jeans and aprons move like dancers between the dinner audience seated along the windows and Hayward and his line cooks, all outfitted in white, double-breasted chef tunics, working the ovens.
"The open kitchen makes us feel like we're part of the play," says Hayward. "We become part of the action?." The restaurant is noisy and energized, controlled chaos. The pressure to perform is enormous, not only because 200 to 250 people will pay an average of $30 apiece for their meals, but because the meals will be prepared "live," right before their eyes. Hayward, a former professional musician, thrives on the pressure and the improvisational atmosphere.
Sam Hayward, then, is a culinary artist, a chef who makes artful use of raw ingredients to create experiences his audiences take into their bodies. If they are what they eat, he is what he cooks. And, as it happens, the evolution of Sam Hayward's culinary career rather neatly encapsulates the evolution of fine dining in Maine over the past 20 years.
Born in Bowling Green, Ohio, in 1949, Samuel E Hayward spent his infancy in Ohio, his childhood in Louisiana, and his formative years in Ithaca, N.Y. His father was a college chaplain, serving first at Bowling Green State University, then Louisiana State and Cornell. Growing up, ages four to 10, in a working class Baton Rouge neighborhood, Hayward recorded some of his earliest and fondest food memories watching the large Cajun-Choctaw clan across the street preparing eternal stews in an old iron kettle suspended over a propane burner in the back yard. That wild, savory, primitive approach to eating made a lasting impression, one that endured through decades of culinary and cultural refinement.
In 1959, the Haywards moved to Ithaca, where Sam developed an early inclination toward music. The Ithaca school system at the time boasted an exceptional music program with composers-in-residence and original works commissioned for student musicians to perform.
"There was a culture of excellence created that was very unusual in a high school," Hayward said. "There was a high level of expectation. Less than a full effort was unacceptable. That was the most important formative experience on the way I think about art and work. I never found that devotion to excellence again once I got to college."
Hayward played the crash cymbals in the marching band, the double bass in the chamber ensemble, and sang in the chorus. He also developed a love for early music, mastering the mandolin and the viola da gamba, and, being a teenager in the 1960s, also played electric bass in a rock band. These musical impulses led Hayward to a checkered academic music career, first at the Westminster Choir School, then the Oberlin Conservatory, Ithaca College and Cornell.
In 1970, Hayward married Jan Dean, his high school sweetheart, and she worked as an intensive care nurse to support them while Sam tried to get his musical career off the ground. Three or four nights a week, he would be on the road with rock and rhythm-and-blues bands, or doing studio work in New York, recording everything from Hasidic music to advertising jingles. Back in Ithaca, he'd support his music habit by reaching electric bass to college students.
"I just wasn't making enough money so I could stop. I was trapped," he recalls. "I couldn't get at what I really wanted -- early music."
Then, one gay, overcast day in February 1974, exhausted from a road tour and not looking forward to tutoring, Hayward turned to his wife at breakfast and said, "Wouldn't it be nice to just chuck it all and go spend the summer on an island in Maine?" Sam and Jan had honeymooned on Mount Desert Island and in the north woods, and Sam still climbs Mount Katahdin several times a year.
Later the same day, a Cornell hotel administration student stopped by for his bass lesson, noticed all the cookbooks in Hayward's house, and said, "Why don't you chuck everything and come cook on an island in Maine for the summer."
"True story!" says Hayward.
It seems Cornell needed a cook for its marine biology field station on Appledore Island in the Isles of Shoals. Did the Shoals Marine Laboratory also need a nurse? Why, yes. So Sam and Jan Hayward packed their bags and spent the summer of 1974 on Appledore.
The decision to try his hand at cooking for profit marked a turning pointing Hayward's life -- away from a musical career, toward a culinary one.
Appledore was not only Hayward's first experience as a professional cook, it was also his introduction to hands-on Maine food -- mussels picked from mooring poles, scallops picked up by divers, by-catch such as monkfish and skate cadged from passing Gloucester draggers.
"We were the only food source on the island," said Hayward. "All systems were self-contained. A 17th century dug well was the only water supply. There were 80 to 120 students and staff and there was no place for them to go. I loved it."
Hayward spent that summer and the following two preparing meals for students and scientists who required high-calorie diets for their active, outdoor life.
In the fall of 1976, with three seasons as a summer chef to his credit, Hayward decided to get serious about cooking and apprenticed himself to Willie Koln, executive chef at the Royal Sonesta Hotel in New Orleans.
Unfortunately, Koln soon left and Hayward found himself permanently assigned to the egg detail, poaching and scrambling hundreds of eggs a day, making omelets innumerable, boiling gallons of grits, roasting racks of bacon, and turning Eons of butter and eggs into hollandaise sauce.
Very quickly, Hayward became disillusioned with the sultry, careless life of the Big Easy. The cavalier manner with which hotels and restaurants treated their foodstuffs, for example, offended his lately acquired Yankee sense of thrift. Brown trout, a staple of New Orleans menus, for instance, were routinely dropped off, unrefrigerated, in the middle of the night, left out in the heat for hours. By the time the restaurant got around to cleaning the fish, they-often smelled so bad that the help left the kitchen.
"In New England, we work pretty hard for the food we get, so we take care of what we procure with some effort," Hayward said.
As luck would have it, however, just as Hayward was about to give up on New Orleans, the former student who had landed him the Isles of Shoals job called to ask, "Why don't you chuck all that and come spend a year in New York City?" The student was now food and beverage manager of The Regency m New York.
So, in 1977, Hayward signed on as chef garde-manger (in charge of cold foods) at the Regency. There he learned the delicious arcana of pates and terrines, mushrooms, caviars and truffles while catering to the wealthy (including CBS chairman Lawrence Tisch, who owned the hotel and lived in the penthouse) in an "old-fashioned, post-Escoffier, silver-plated food service." Said Hayward of the year he spent at The Regency under chef Gary Clausson, "It was a terrific finishing education."
The summer of 1977, however, was the summer of the Great Blackout, the summer of Son of Sam, and there was menace in the air over the Big Apple. One day, Hayward walked into the Regency locker room to find that a kitchen worker had just shot up the place with his new Saturday night special.
As one of only three English-speaking employees of the hotel kitchen, and the only one to actually see the gun, Hayward was fingered by the Dominican kitchen staff as the snitch when the NYPD and the FBI showed up to question the gunman. Discretion being the better part of getting out of town, Hayward headed to Maine that very night, arrived at Appledore and promptly got on the phone to his old suppliers, asking who in Maine was looking for a good cook. The name that came up was Maurice Andre, the diminutive Parisian chef who brought French cuisine to South Paris.
In the 1970s, the avant-garde of fine European dining established a beachhead in surf-and-turf, deep-fried Maine. here were, for example, the Gaslight, the Vineyard, and Marcel's in Portland, Le Domaine in Hancock, the Whistling Oyster in Ogunquit -- and Maurice Restaurant Francais in South Paris. In 1978, the year Hayward moved to Maine for good, New Yorker writer John McPhee celebrated the arrival of haute cuisine in the hinterlands by profiling an eccentric New Jersey chef named Otto in an article entitled "Brigade de Cuisine," later collected in the book Table of Contents. "That article changed my life," said Hayward.
What the popularity of "Brigade de Cuisine" did was, in effect, grant permission to a new generation of chefs to establish serious restaurants in small towns all over the country. Sam Hayward would become one of these new regionalists.
At Maurice's, Hayward replaced chef Rebecca Reilly, now the state's foremost cooking teacher and culinary TV commentator on food. Reilly, Hayward recalls, had been a purist, expertly performing the classic dishes of continental cuisine escalopes of veal, filet mignon, tournedos, chicken cordon bleu, chicken Kiev, onion soup gratine, etc. He, on the other hand, fell under the spell of La Nouvelle Cuisine, the culinary French Revolution that replaced butter, egg and cream sauces with artfully presented and imaginatively conceived creations featuring fresh, local ingredients.
"I did think of food as an art form," said Hayward. "I went from making improvisational music to making food." Wanting to push the envelope of creative cooking, Hayward tried introducing game birds and local produce to the menu lit Maurice's. Still, he found himself treading water, creatively. So when Maurice Andre died in 1980, Hayward went looking for a better opportunity and, as luck would have it, ended up jumping out of the frying pan into the fire.
When Hayward moved to Maine in 1978, he spent his first winter in coastal Martinsville in a house owned by artist Cynthia Hyde. The two had met on Appledore when Hayward was cooking and Hyde was a student there. Cynthia Hyde and her husband Jim Kinnealey operate Caldbeck Gallery in Rockland, and Kinnealey's wholesale meat company is the principal supplier of the choice cuts at Fore Street. So when Hayward was offered a job as the chef at the Samose Resort in Rockland, he welcomed the chance to get back to the coast.
At the time, the Samoset had just been taken over by new owners who, among other things, managed to incur the wrath of the Maine arts community by taking a chain saw to the Bernard Langlais sculpture in front of the hotel. Though the Samoset has long since established itself as a resort and convention center, in 1980, the new owners had little money, no general manager, not enough staff, and no idea how to run a resort hotel.
In Rockland, Hayward was quickly disabused of the notion that the Samoset might be the place for him to make his mark on Maine cuisine. Short of funds and kitchen help, he was forced to purchase prepared foods from large urban suppliers and to work 100 to 120 hours a week.
"I ended up in the hospital from sheer exhaustion and stress," he said.
Then, he was fired. Marcel LaCasse, formerly of Marcel's in Portland, came aboard as general manager of the Samoset and replaced Hayward with Richard DiFranco, former owner of the Gaslight in Portland.
Licking his wounds, Hayward signed on as a consultant to help DiFranco's wife, Elizabeth, in the kitchen at The Wife of Bath. Richard DiFranco, it turned out, had a shorter run at the Samoset than Hayward did and went to work as the chef at 22 Lincoln in Brunswick. In 1981, Sam Hayward completed the culinary musical chairs by replacing DiFranco there. 22 Lincoln, a little side-street, college-town dining room with aspirations to greatness, was the restaurant and the address that finally put chef Sam Hayward on the cuisinier map. Within a few months of being hired as chef, he purchased an ownership interest and settled in for the next decade -- the first half of which would prove to be far more productive and profitable than the last.
At 22 Lincoln, Hayward's creative juices flowed, inspired by the revelation of unexpected sources of fine foodstuffs. The first summer Hayward was in the kitchen a gardener from nearby Lisbon named Frank Gross stopped by to see if 22 Lincoln might be interested in some fresh, locally grown produce. Hayward took one look at the leeks from Gross' garden and flipped. They were twice as big as any leeks he had ever seen; the color, texture and taste were all superb.
"That was another turning point," said Hayward. "I started thinking of Maine as my food source rather than the Boston markets. I figured out how to incorporate anything Frank brought me. If it's fresh, if it's perfect, if its got taste, buy it, we'll use it!"
If you've never heard of farmer Frank Gross, it may be because, to this day, Sam Hayward buys most of what he grows.
Now, like most paradigm shifts, the shift from a reliance on imported ingredients to locally produced ones was fairly simple, yet profound. The realization that local was better -- and seasonal was better still -- established Sam Hayward and 22 Lincoln in the forefront of new American cooking. To this day, he gets more excited about a salad of fresh winter greens than he does about most of his entrees. Former Boston Globe restaurant critic Robert Levey, a summer resident of Chebeague Island, quickly discovered the virtues of 22 Lincoln and spread the good word.
"Sam was a good American chef using the best and Freshest ingredients he could find," said Levey. "In terms of food on the plate, 22 Lincoln was at least as good as any place I dined outside of Boston."
The renown of 22 Lincoln was such that John McPhee, who helped touch off the gourmet diaspora with his 1978 New Yorker article, eventually turned up there while visiting a daughter at Bowdoin College. Hayward recognized McPhee at once and brought his battered copy of "Brigade de Cuisine" out from the kitchen for the author to sign.
When the Maine economy began slumping in the late '80s, however, 22 Lincoln suffered. Lost on a residential side street and better known in Boston and New York than in Maine, the restaurant went through a difficult three years during which Hayward was unable even to take a salary.
"I came out of the 1980s utterly ruined," Hayward says now.
In 1991, after a series of gala farewell dinners, Hayward let 22 Lincoln and went to work for the Harraseeket Inn in Freeport. There, he brought a distinctive local touch to the inn's classic European white linen and silver service, livening up the menu with all manner of wild game dishes.
The gourmet world knew who Sam Hayward was now, and they followed him wherever he went. At Thanksgiving, 1991, Hayward was invited to prepare an all-Maine Thanksgiving dinner at James Beard House, one of America's foremost culinary think tanks in New York. Two years ago, he was invited back to help prepare an all-lobster feast.
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Maine was hit by a series of ethnic dining waves -- Thai, Vietnamese, Mexican, Afghan, Jamaican, barbecue, mesquite grille. Every season seemed to bring a new and unexpected taste surprise. But when Sam Hayward looked to the future, he saw the past.
"I could see the public was moving away from formal restaurants toward user-friendly restaurants. The time was right to explore more rustic cooking traditions." In a back alley in Portland's Old Port, Dana Street had established a hot, noisy, crowded little Mediterranean-style seafood bistro called Street & Company which featured an open kitchen -- food preparation as performance, dining as entertainment. That was just what Sam Hayward was after, so when Street contacted him about opening a new restaurant Hayward took the plunge.
"We really wanted to create a restaurant specifically for a Portland audience," says Hayward of Fore Street. "Everyone does well during tourist season, but restaurants fail if they don't have a local following."
Though Fore Street serves whole roasted fish, it grants seafood primacy to its sister shop, Street & Company, while focusing its wood-fired agenda on meats. On any given night, one-third of its orders will consist of apple wood grilled hanger steak and turnspit roasted pork loin. The idea is simplicity itself -- take great tasting foods and just sear in the flavor. Levey calls the Fore Street fare "upscale down home cooking. " "Sam has evolved by going back to dead simple cooking -- wood roasting and sautes," said Levey. "It's been a tasty simplification process."
There is a bit of a political agenda attached to the Fore Street menu -- Hayward has recently been in the news for boycotting endangered swordfish, for instance, and he is careful to designate that his scallops are harvested by divers and not bottom-scouring draggers. But the elegantly simple food Hayward now prefers is ultimately a return to his roots. He even tried serving pot stews such as those he grew up savoring in Cajun Louisiana, but the Portland dining public wasn't quite ready for designer stews.
Now it may be that apple-wood roasting turns out to be just the latest chic food trend, but whatever the next good thing is, Sam Hayward believes there has been a sea change in our approach to eating out.
"The biggest change that's taken place in my lifetime," said Hayward, "is that we've gone from a culture in which the food was about the chef -- the wood was about me -- to one in which the food is about itself."

Subject: Restaurants; Chefs; Personal profiles

Location: Portland ME US New England

People: Hayward, Sam

Company / organization: Name: Fore Street; SIC: 5812

Title: Sam can cook: If all the kitchen's a stage, then he's the leading player

Publication title: Maine Times; Portland, Me.

Volume: 30

Issue: 22

Pages: 4

Number of pages: 0

Publication year: 1998

Publication date: Mar 19, 1998

Publisher: Maine Times

Place of publication: Portland, Me.

Country of publication: United States, Portland, Me.

Publication subject: Environmental Studies

ISSN: 00250783

Source type: Newspapers

Language of publication: English

Document type: NEWSPAPER

Accession number: 98-81723

ProQuest document ID: 246914931

Document URL: https://search.proquest.com/docview/246914931?accountid=10457

Copyright: Copyright Maine Times Mar 19, 1998

Last updated: 2014-05-24

Database: Global Newsstream

____________________________________________________________

Sam can cook: If all the kitchen's a stage, then he's the leading player

Author: Beem, Edgar Allen

Publication info: Maine Times ; Portland, Me. [Portland, Me]19 Mar 1998: 4. [Duplicate]

https://search.proquest.com/docview/246887996?accountid=10457

Abstract: "AT ITS ROOT, ANY CIVILIZATION is organized around the production and procurement of food," Sam Hayward tells a ass of sleepy Scarborough High School students."

Links: http://CX2EF4JW8J.search.serialssolutions.com/directLink?&amp;atitle=Sam+can+cook%3A+If+all+the+kitchen%27s+a+stage%2C+then+he%27s+the+leading+player&amp;author=Beem%2C+Edgar+Allen&amp;issn=00250783&amp;title=Maine+Times&amp;volume=30&amp;issue=22&amp;date=1998-03-19&amp;spage=4&amp;id=doi:&amp;sid=ProQ_ss&amp;genre=article

Full text: "AT ITS ROOT, ANY CIVILIZATION is organized around the production and procurement of food," Sam Hayward tells a ass of sleepy Scarborough High School students."
Hayward, 49, professorial in glasses, mustache and tweed sport coat, then proceeds to wake up the teens with a late breakfast consisting of duck comfit, a gruel of wheat, peas, lentils, celery root, parsnip, turnip, fennel, onions and salt cod, and a dollop of mango sorbet.
Hayward, chef-proprietor of Fore Street restaurant in Portland and one of the best cooks in Maine, is guest teaching a history class, providing a capsule account of the impact of food on history -- Columbus was looking for a new spice route to India when he ran into North America, remember -- and passing out samples of foods eaten in France before the Crusades.
Hayward spends the morning teaching four classes at Scarborough High, then, late the same afternoon, conducts yet a fifth "class," instructing the servers at Fore Street in the finer points of the evening's newly minted menu. The spring-run shad roe, he explains, is granular in texture and looks like a sausage. It will be served as an appetizer with a light mayonnaise, capers and chives. And, oh yes, the Pemaquid oyster supplier damaged his drag, so the oysters tonight are from Sakonnet Point, Rhode Island.
Fore Street is located in a low, one-story brick building at 288 Fore St., not far from the Customs House. Its bank of high windows gives diners a panoramic view of Portland's waterfront and the Casco Bay Lines terminal, but the building itself is as unprepossessing as the car garage it once was. A wood shed attached to one side of the building adds to its raw, utilitarian look. Since it opened in June 1996, however, Fore Street has been one of Portland's hottest restaurants -- the place to eat if you can find it (the small sign offers little help) and if you can get in. By the time Hayward concludes his parsing of the evening's menu, the lobby and bar are already full with the first wave of diners waiting to be seated -- on a weeknight in dreary March.
Over the past 20 years, dining has become a form of entertainment in Maine, not just an occasion for a fancy meal but a kind of social theater. At Fore Street, the theatricality of dining is accentuated by the open kitchen. The dining room is dominated by wood-fired ovens and flaming grills. Servers in white shirts, jeans and aprons move like dancers between the dinner audience seated along the windows and Hayward and his line cooks, all outfitted in white, double-breasted chef tunics, working the ovens.
"The open kitchen makes us feel like we're part of the play," says Hayward. "We become part of the action?." The restaurant is noisy and energized, controlled chaos. The pressure to perform is enormous, not only because 200 to 250 people will pay an average of $30 apiece for their meals, but because the meals will be prepared "live," right before their eyes. Hayward, a former professional musician, thrives on the pressure and the improvisational atmosphere.
Sam Hayward, then, is a culinary artist, a chef who makes artful use of raw ingredients to create experiences his audiences take into their bodies. If they are what they eat, he is what he cooks. And, as it happens, the evolution of Sam Hayward's culinary career rather neatly encapsulates the evolution of fine dining in Maine over the past 20 years.
Born in Bowling Green, Ohio, in 1949, Samuel E Hayward spent his infancy in Ohio, his childhood in Louisiana, and his formative years in Ithaca, N.Y. His father was a college chaplain, serving first at Bowling Green State University, then Louisiana State and Cornell. Growing up, ages four to 10, in a working class Baton Rouge neighborhood, Hayward recorded some of his earliest and fondest food memories watching the large Cajun-Choctaw clan across the street preparing eternal stews in an old iron kettle suspended over a propane burner in the back yard. That wild, savory, primitive approach to eating made a lasting impression, one that endured through decades of culinary and cultural refinement.
In 1959, the Haywards moved to Ithaca, where Sam developed an early inclination toward music. The Ithaca school system at the time boasted an exceptional music program with composers-in-residence and original works commissioned for student musicians to perform.
"There was a culture of excellence created that was very unusual in a high school," Hayward said. "There was a high level of expectation. Less than a full effort was unacceptable. That was the most important formative experience on the way I think about art and work. I never found that devotion to excellence again once I got to college."
Hayward played the crash cymbals in the marching band, the double bass in the chamber ensemble, and sang in the chorus. He also developed a love for early music, mastering the mandolin and the viola da gamba, and, being a teenager in the 1960s, also played electric bass in a rock band. These musical impulses led Hayward to a checkered academic music career, first at the Westminster Choir School, then the Oberlin Conservatory, Ithaca College and Cornell.
In 1970, Hayward married Jan Dean, his high school sweetheart, and she worked as an intensive care nurse to support them while Sam tried to get his musical career off the ground. Three or four nights a week, he would be on the road with rock and rhythm-and-blues bands, or doing studio work in New York, recording everything from Hasidic music to advertising jingles. Back in Ithaca, he'd support his music habit by reaching electric bass to college students.
"I just wasn't making enough money so I could stop. I was trapped," he recalls. "I couldn't get at what I really wanted -- early music."
Then, one gay, overcast day in February 1974, exhausted from a road tour and not looking forward to tutoring, Hayward turned to his wife at breakfast and said, "Wouldn't it be nice to just chuck it all and go spend the summer on an island in Maine?" Sam and Jan had honeymooned on Mount Desert Island and in the north woods, and Sam still climbs Mount Katahdin several times a year.
Later the same day, a Cornell hotel administration student stopped by for his bass lesson, noticed all the cookbooks in Hayward's house, and said, "Why don't you chuck everything and come cook on an island in Maine for the summer."
"True story!" says Hayward.
It seems Cornell needed a cook for its marine biology field station on Appledore Island in the Isles of Shoals. Did the Shoals Marine Laboratory also need a nurse? Why, yes. So Sam and Jan Hayward packed their bags and spent the summer of 1974 on Appledore.
The decision to try his hand at cooking for profit marked a turning pointing Hayward's life -- away from a musical career, toward a culinary one.
Appledore was not only Hayward's first experience as a professional cook, it was also his introduction to hands-on Maine food -- mussels picked from mooring poles, scallops picked up by divers, by-catch such as monkfish and skate cadged from passing Gloucester draggers.
"We were the only food source on the island," said Hayward. "All systems were self-contained. A 17th century dug well was the only water supply. There were 80 to 120 students and staff and there was no place for them to go. I loved it."
Hayward spent that summer and the following two preparing meals for students and scientists who required high-calorie diets for their active, outdoor life.
In the fall of 1976, with three seasons as a summer chef to his credit, Hayward decided to get serious about cooking and apprenticed himself to Willie Koln, executive chef at the Royal Sonesta Hotel in New Orleans.
Unfortunately, Koln soon left and Hayward found himself permanently assigned to the egg detail, poaching and scrambling hundreds of eggs a day, making omelets innumerable, boiling gallons of grits, roasting racks of bacon, and turning Eons of butter and eggs into hollandaise sauce.
Very quickly, Hayward became disillusioned with the sultry, careless life of the Big Easy. The cavalier manner with which hotels and restaurants treated their foodstuffs, for example, offended his lately acquired Yankee sense of thrift. Brown trout, a staple of New Orleans menus, for instance, were routinely dropped off, unrefrigerated, in the middle of the night, left out in the heat for hours. By the time the restaurant got around to cleaning the fish, they-often smelled so bad that the help left the kitchen.
"In New England, we work pretty hard for the food we get, so we take care of what we procure with some effort," Hayward said.
As luck would have it, however, just as Hayward was about to give up on New Orleans, the former student who had landed him the Isles of Shoals job called to ask, "Why don't you chuck all that and come spend a year in New York City?" The student was now food and beverage manager of The Regency m New York.
So, in 1977, Hayward signed on as chef garde-manger (in charge of cold foods) at the Regency. There he learned the delicious arcana of pates and terrines, mushrooms, caviars and truffles while catering to the wealthy (including CBS chairman Lawrence Tisch, who owned the hotel and lived in the penthouse) in an "old-fashioned, post-Escoffier, silver-plated food service." Said Hayward of the year he spent at The Regency under chef Gary Clausson, "It was a terrific finishing education."
The summer of 1977, however, was the summer of the Great Blackout, the summer of Son of Sam, and there was menace in the air over the Big Apple. One day, Hayward walked into the Regency locker room to find that a kitchen worker had just shot up the place with his new Saturday night special.
As one of only three English-speaking employees of the hotel kitchen, and the only one to actually see the gun, Hayward was fingered by the Dominican kitchen staff as the snitch when the NYPD and the FBI showed up to question the gunman. Discretion being the better part of getting out of town, Hayward headed to Maine that very night, arrived at Appledore and promptly got on the phone to his old suppliers, asking who in Maine was looking for a good cook. The name that came up was Maurice Andre, the diminutive Parisian chef who brought French cuisine to South Paris.
In the 1970s, the avant-garde of fine European dining established a beachhead in surf-and-turf, deep-fried Maine. here were, for example, the Gaslight, the Vineyard, and Marcel's in Portland, Le Domaine in Hancock, the Whistling Oyster in Ogunquit -- and Maurice Restaurant Francais in South Paris. In 1978, the year Hayward moved to Maine for good, New Yorker writer John McPhee celebrated the arrival of haute cuisine in the hinterlands by profiling an eccentric New Jersey chef named Otto in an article entitled "Brigade de Cuisine," later collected in the book Table of Contents. "That article changed my life," said Hayward.
What the popularity of "Brigade de Cuisine" did was, in effect, grant permission to a new generation of chefs to establish serious restaurants in small towns all over the country. Sam Hayward would become one of these new regionalists.
At Maurice's, Hayward replaced chef Rebecca Reilly, now the state's foremost cooking teacher and culinary TV commentator on food. Reilly, Hayward recalls, had been a purist, expertly performing the classic dishes of continental cuisine escalopes of veal, filet mignon, tournedos, chicken cordon bleu, chicken Kiev, onion soup gratine, etc. He, on the other hand, fell under the spell of La Nouvelle Cuisine, the culinary French Revolution that replaced butter, egg and cream sauces with artfully presented and imaginatively conceived creations featuring fresh, local ingredients.
"I did think of food as an art form," said Hayward. "I went from making improvisational music to making food." Wanting to push the envelope of creative cooking, Hayward tried introducing game birds and local produce to the menu lit Maurice's. Still, he found himself treading water, creatively. So when Maurice Andre died in 1980, Hayward went looking for a better opportunity and, as luck would have it, ended up jumping out of the frying pan into the fire.
When Hayward moved to Maine in 1978, he spent his first winter in coastal Martinsville in a house owned by artist Cynthia Hyde. The two had met on Appledore when Hayward was cooking and Hyde was a student there. Cynthia Hyde and her husband Jim Kinnealey operate Caldbeck Gallery in Rockland, and Kinnealey's wholesale meat company is the principal supplier of the choice cuts at Fore Street. So when Hayward was offered a job as the chef at the Samose Resort in Rockland, he welcomed the chance to get back to the coast.
At the time, the Samoset had just been taken over by new owners who, among other things, managed to incur the wrath of the Maine arts community by taking a chain saw to the Bernard Langlais sculpture in front of the hotel. Though the Samoset has long since established itself as a resort and convention center, in 1980, the new owners had little money, no general manager, not enough staff, and no idea how to run a resort hotel.
In Rockland, Hayward was quickly disabused of the notion that the Samoset might be the place for him to make his mark on Maine cuisine. Short of funds and kitchen help, he was forced to purchase prepared foods from large urban suppliers and to work 100 to 120 hours a week.
"I ended up in the hospital from sheer exhaustion and stress," he said.
Then, he was fired. Marcel LaCasse, formerly of Marcel's in Portland, came aboard as general manager of the Samoset and replaced Hayward with Richard DiFranco, former owner of the Gaslight in Portland.
Licking his wounds, Hayward signed on as a consultant to help DiFranco's wife, Elizabeth, in the kitchen at The Wife of Bath. Richard DiFranco, it turned out, had a shorter run at the Samoset than Hayward did and went to work as the chef at 22 Lincoln in Brunswick. In 1981, Sam Hayward completed the culinary musical chairs by replacing DiFranco there. 22 Lincoln, a little side-street, college-town dining room with aspirations to greatness, was the restaurant and the address that finally put chef Sam Hayward on the cuisinier map. Within a few months of being hired as chef, he purchased an ownership interest and settled in for the next decade -- the first half of which would prove to be far more productive and profitable than the last.
At 22 Lincoln, Hayward's creative juices flowed, inspired by the revelation of unexpected sources of fine foodstuffs. The first summer Hayward was in the kitchen a gardener from nearby Lisbon named Frank Gross stopped by to see if 22 Lincoln might be interested in some fresh, locally grown produce. Hayward took one look at the leeks from Gross' garden and flipped. They were twice as big as any leeks he had ever seen; the color, texture and taste were all superb.
"That was another turning point," said Hayward. "I started thinking of Maine as my food source rather than the Boston markets. I figured out how to incorporate anything Frank brought me. If it's fresh, if it's perfect, if its got taste, buy it, we'll use it!"
If you've never heard of farmer Frank Gross, it may be because, to this day, Sam Hayward buys most of what he grows.
Now, like most paradigm shifts, the shift from a reliance on imported ingredients to locally produced ones was fairly simple, yet profound. The realization that local was better -- and seasonal was better still -- established Sam Hayward and 22 Lincoln in the forefront of new American cooking. To this day, he gets more excited about a salad of fresh winter greens than he does about most of his entrees. Former Boston Globe restaurant critic Robert Levey, a summer resident of Chebeague Island, quickly discovered the virtues of 22 Lincoln and spread the good word.
"Sam was a good American chef using the best and Freshest ingredients he could find," said Levey. "In terms of food on the plate, 22 Lincoln was at least as good as any place I dined outside of Boston."
The renown of 22 Lincoln was such that John McPhee, who helped touch off the gourmet diaspora with his 1978 New Yorker article, eventually turned up there while visiting a daughter at Bowdoin College. Hayward recognized McPhee at once and brought his battered copy of "Brigade de Cuisine" out from the kitchen for the author to sign.
When the Maine economy began slumping in the late '80s, however, 22 Lincoln suffered. Lost on a residential side street and better known in Boston and New York than in Maine, the restaurant went through a difficult three years during which Hayward was unable even to take a salary.
"I came out of the 1980s utterly ruined," Hayward says now.
In 1991, after a series of gala farewell dinners, Hayward let 22 Lincoln and went to work for the Harraseeket Inn in Freeport. There, he brought a distinctive local touch to the inn's classic European white linen and silver service, livening up the menu with all manner of wild game dishes.
The gourmet world knew who Sam Hayward was now, and they followed him wherever he went. At Thanksgiving, 1991, Hayward was invited to prepare an all-Maine Thanksgiving dinner at James Beard House, one of America's foremost culinary think tanks in New York. Two years ago, he was invited back to help prepare an all-lobster feast.
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Maine was hit by a series of ethnic dining waves -- Thai, Vietnamese, Mexican, Afghan, Jamaican, barbecue, mesquite grille. Every season seemed to bring a new and unexpected taste surprise. But when Sam Hayward looked to the future, he saw the past.
"I could see the public was moving away from formal restaurants toward user-friendly restaurants. The time was right to explore more rustic cooking traditions." In a back alley in Portland's Old Port, Dana Street had established a hot, noisy, crowded little Mediterranean-style seafood bistro called Street & Company which featured an open kitchen -- food preparation as performance, dining as entertainment. That was just what Sam Hayward was after, so when Street contacted him about opening a new restaurant Hayward took the plunge.
"We really wanted to create a restaurant specifically for a Portland audience," says Hayward of Fore Street. "Everyone does well during tourist season, but restaurants fail if they don't have a local following."
Though Fore Street serves whole roasted fish, it grants seafood primacy to its sister shop, Street & Company, while focusing its wood-fired agenda on meats. On any given night, one-third of its orders will consist of apple wood grilled hanger steak and turnspit roasted pork loin. The idea is simplicity itself -- take great tasting foods and just sear in the flavor. Levey calls the Fore Street fare "upscale down home cooking. " "Sam has evolved by going back to dead simple cooking -- wood roasting and sautes," said Levey. "It's been a tasty simplification process."
There is a bit of a political agenda attached to the Fore Street menu -- Hayward has recently been in the news for boycotting endangered swordfish, for instance, and he is careful to designate that his scallops are harvested by divers and not bottom-scouring draggers. But the elegantly simple food Hayward now prefers is ultimately a return to his roots. He even tried serving pot stews such as those he grew up savoring in Cajun Louisiana, but the Portland dining public wasn't quite ready for designer stews.
Now it may be that apple-wood roasting turns out to be just the latest chic food trend, but whatever the next good thing is, Sam Hayward believes there has been a sea change in our approach to eating out.
"The biggest change that's taken place in my lifetime," said Hayward, "is that we've gone from a culture in which the food was about the chef -- the wood was about me -- to one in which the food is about itself."

Subject: Restaurants; Chefs; Personal profiles

Location: Portland ME US New England

People: Hayward, Sam

Company / organization: Name: Fore Street; SIC: 5812

Title: Sam can cook: If all the kitchen's a stage, then he's the leading player

Publication title: Maine Times; Portland, Me.

Volume: 30

Issue: 22

Pages: 4

Number of pages: 0

Publication year: 1998

Publication date: Mar 19, 1998

Publisher: Maine Times

Place of publication: Portland, Me.

Country of publication: United States, Portland, Me.

Publication subject: Environmental Studies

ISSN: 00250783

Source type: Newspapers

Language of publication: English

Document type: NEWSPAPER

Accession number: 98-81723

ProQuest document ID: 246887996

Document URL: https://search.proquest.com/docview/246887996?accountid=10457

Copyright: Copyright Maine Times Mar 19, 1998

Last updated: 2011-12-02

Database: Global Newsstream

____________________________________________________________

Two schools, one ocean and a sea of mysteries

Author: Weegar, Andrew K

Publication info: Maine Times ; Portland, Me. [Portland, Me]21 Aug 1997: 3.

https://search.proquest.com/docview/246888089?accountid=10457

Abstract: AFTER only a few months of living in Maine, Matt Cusack is thinking about attending graduate school here. Cusack, who's from North Carolina, has been participating in a summer internship program run by the University of Maine. "I'd never been to Maine before, or even to New England," he said. "But I think I'll definitely be applying here."

Links: http://CX2EF4JW8J.search.serialssolutions.com/directLink?&amp;atitle=Two+schools%2C+one+ocean+and+a+sea+of+mysteries&amp;author=Weegar%2C+Andrew+K&amp;issn=00250783&amp;title=Maine+Times&amp;volume=29&amp;issue=43&amp;date=1997-08-21&amp;spage=3&amp;id=doi:&amp;sid=ProQ_ss&amp;genre=article

Full text: AFTER only a few months of living in Maine, Matt Cusack is thinking about attending graduate school here. Cusack, who's from North Carolina, has been participating in a summer internship program run by the University of Maine. "I'd never been to Maine before, or even to New England," he said. "But I think I'll definitely be applying here."
UNTIL a few years ago, Maine had no widely recognized marine science program, and the research programs along the coast operated independently of each other. Relations between two state programs -- the University of Maine and Maine Maritime -- grew particularly frosty in the early 1990s, as both schools established undergraduate programs in marine science within a few years of each other.
At the time, Angus King, now governor, said it was "patently absurd" that the University of Maine did not have a marine resources program, and future Marine Resources Commissioner Robin Alden said, "Maine has an obligation to have a strong marine resources program that starts with an undergraduate degree and continues through graduate education."
The move toward creating a single School of Marine Sciences was first recommended by consultants hired by UM in 1991. Proponents listed two reasons for supporting the new school: First, it would bring together 70-odd professors already involved in marine research; second, it would make it easier for the school to apply for grants. The creation of the new school got powerful backing, including the state's two major business groups, the Maine Alliance and the Maine Chamber of Commerce, which have since merged.
Maine Maritime saw things differently. Officials at the school claimed that UM's program would be a duplication of effort, and would offer the same programs as its own Corning School of Ocean Studies. "A marine studies undergraduate major at Orono makes about as much sense as a forestry major at Castine," MMA President Leonard Tyler wrote to his board of trustees. Tyler protested that MMA had founded its own school after receiving assurances from the university it had no plans to do the same. What made the proposal to create a new marine studies program doubly controversial was that it came at a time when other programs at the school were facing downsizing and budget cuts.
Today, both undergraduate programs are drawing students, and both take pains to leave the past behind. John Barlow served as dean of the Corning School during the controversy, and now says "It's all just a matter of fact now. There's no sense rattling that cage. I think we can get enough good students to fill both programs."
Barlow said things at the Corning School "have come a long way in the last eight years. We have the faculty and the students. Our students are going out and getting good jobs. It's the right place for a marine program."
The school complemented its fleet of research vessels with the State of Maine, a vessel built by the U.S. Navy. "It gives us some tremendous opportunities to have such a huge modern vessel," said Barlow. "There probably isn't another marine program in the country with a ship like that."
Traditionally, programs at Maine Maritime have served the commercial maritime industry, and the degree programs have names like the Power Engineering Program, or the International Business and Logistics Program. "Our primary focus was to teach people how to be a ship's engineer, or how to navigate large commercial ships. It seemed like a natural step for us to take."
Establishing a marine science major at the Corning School did as much to change the look of Maine Maritime as the arrival of the State of Maine. "At least half of the students in the science program are female," Barlow said. "It's hard to recruit females for the engineering programs."
THE University of Maine has spent the past several years developing the curriculum for its undergraduate program, which was approved by trustees last year. "It is a four-year program with two tracks, one in physical sciences, one in biological sciences," said James Wilson, associate director of the School of Marine Sciences. "We have a very experienced faculty. The average years of teaching is probably about 15. The classes will all be taught by professors, and not by teaching assistants."
What Maine Maritime has, of course, and what the University of Maine does not, is immediately visible by a visit to either campus: the ocean. But the university has developed a strong marine laboratory at the Darling Center, a 150-acre campus with a flowing water ocean lab located on the Damariscotta River Estuary, about four miles from the Gulf of Maine. The undergraduate degree program will include one or two semesters at Darling.
"Until about 1992 it was a very sleepy little place," said Wilson. "That's changed. This summer there's something like 132 outside researchers from all over the world -- Chile, Japan, Germany -- and all over the U.S. coming in to use that laboratory."
A program at the center offers 40 undergraduate internships during the summer, and it also offers a number of one-week field trips. The center is building an 80-person dormitory, with most of the money raised by a group called Friends of the Gulf of Maine.
Wilson credits the activity at the center to its dean, Kevin Eckelbarger. "In five years he's turned that place from a not-so-bad lab into a place that's just bursting with intellectual power."
Before establishing its undergraduate program, the university offered several graduate degrees, and an undergraduate program in aquaculture. Since consolidating the school, there are now 35 graduate students, nearly all supported by research grants. "That group brings in about 20 to 25 percent of the research money coming into the university," said Wilson. "One really neat thing that's happening is by taking all these people from oceanography, physics, plant biology, all of a sudden, we're getting this explosion of interdisciplinary work that's coming up."
ANOTHER strength of the university's program has been a wealth of research of practical use to fishermen in the Gulf of Maine, at times drawing on topics suggested by fishermen themselves. Wilson is working on a project that came from "talking to fishermen about how local stocks of cod might develop in certain bays. it is possible that we may get physical and biological circumstances that retain larvae in a fairly limited area. If the biological conditions confirm what the fishermen are talking about, it could have an enormous impact, and may even mean we would have to change the way we manage -- not manage as if there was one big stock out there."
The number of research projects with applied uses is even more evident after a tour of the facility. Aside from general projects on global warming, beach erosion, and the geological and maritime history of New England, students study ways to successfully raise surf clams in aquaculture, and the ways shellfish absorb the dinoflagellate that causes red tide.
Bob Steneck is a full professor at the university, with an office at the Darling Center. On his wall is a picture of Hillary Clinton smiling at what looks like Czech President Vaclav Havel; on closer examination, it turns out to be Maine lobsterman Dave Cousins. Steneck works closely with lobster fishermen, and his work at the Darling Center is closely followed by the lobster industry. A graduate student at the university serves as a scientific liaison to lobstermen, while another works with urchin divers.
"I got my degree at Johns Hopkins, where they definitely look down their noses at anything applied," Steneck said. "I don't think that's the best approach. With limited funding, we've got to find ways to make the university's research seem relevant to more people."
Lobstermen, he said, "have been generous to a person" in supporting his work, and in turn, "We're trying to help them make decisions by demystifying the science."
Steneck's research has contributed a great deal to scientific understanding of lobster biology. "When I got started studying lobsters in 1982, nobody knew where the nursery grounds were," Steneck said. "Nobody knew what lobsters did early in life."
A researcher first identified the nursery grounds in 1987, and Steneck's work has documented the early life of lobsters, which go through four stages of development before they look like a lobster. This fourth stage drifts near the surface, moved by wind and ocean currents, before settling to the bottom in shallow areas. "In water 60 feet or deeper, they are very rare," says Steneck. "Even in shallow water, they are limited to cobble bottoms, where the young can find protection from predation. You'll find the young at a density of 10 to 12 per square meter in cobble bottom," he said. But cobble bottom is relatively limited on the coast, meaning that "from 2 to 10 percent of coastline is appropriate nursery ground."
For lobsters who settle on other areas, it's a short life. "We've done some experiments with tethered lobsters that show the median time to predation outside cobble is 15 minutes."
The mechanisms of lobster settlement, which Steneck is now studying, is the key to new recruitment in the population. "Lobster larval behavior probably contributes a lot to lobster landings," he said. "We're just beginning to unravel that now." His current work looks at the distribution of reproductive lobsters, "how that interfaces with ocean currents, and how that interfaces with settlement."
He is beginning to discover that settlement is also influenced by ocean temperatures. "That's important. It could mean that significant variations in lobster landings since the 1940s can be explained by variations in temperature in August when lobsters are settling." With temperatures conducive to lobster settling this year, "we'll know in about one month if settlement is up, and I predict it will be."
Although it may seem startling that something as familiar and as utilized as the Gulf of Maine could still harbor scientific mysteries, it can and does. Other research at the Darling Center studies creatures from microorganisms to fish, and Steneck is taking a closer look at the biology of sea urchins.
The history of fisheries on the coast is boom and bust.
The inshore fisheries for cod, pollock, and other species were largely extirpated earlier in this century, with the development of efficient motors to power vessels to chase the fish and refrigeration to send them to market. Although the evidence is largely circumstantial, lobsters probably benefited from the loss of groundfish, as the niche occupied by cod was filled by smaller species.
Some things are clear. "In essence, what we've done is move further and further down the food pyramid -- removing the cod and the pollock -- until we're primarily taking lobsters, and even some of the herbivores, like urchins."
The ripple effects in an ecosystem as a species is removed are difficult to document, however. But this is just what Steneck is now aiming to do with sea urchins. Off the coast of Maine, urchins fill a vital role in grazing kelp, and are efficient enough to keep large kelp beds from forming. What is unusual is that urchins are apparently the only species in the Gulf of Maine capable of doing this. "That is very unusual, even unique, to have an entire trophic level filled by just one species," said Steneck.
As the urchins have been removed, Steneck has documented a number of effects: First, the explosion of kelp beds off the coast. These, in turn, provide shelter for lobsters, and for some groundfish, like pollock. "This is one of the most striking examples of a human impact on an ecosystem we know of. We're starting to see more pollock than we've seen in a long time." The kelp also provides habitat to lobsters of near-harvestable size, particularly over ledge.
"We've got consistent data from our 15 years of lobster surveys to show we've had a tremendous increase in lobster habitat in that short time," said Steneck.
The one species that cannot thrive in these kelp beds, ironically, is urchins Mature beds harbor a number of parasites that devastate urchins trying to recolonize the beds. "In some areas in York County, we've seen 99 percent mortality in young urchins," said Steneck. "At this point, life is too short for me to study all of these things. I just live vicariously through my graduate students."
Beyond the goal of "using marine science as a way to develop mental agility in students," Steneck is hoping the work at the Darling Center and the university "will train the next generation of fish scientists. People who not only understand ecology, oceanography, but the lifestyle and culture of the harvesters."
Steneck said the success of the Darling Center speaks volumes about the need for marine education in Maine, and he said he doesn't worry about competition with Maine Maritime or the Bigelow Labs. "I never really saw the Maine Maritime program as a problem. To me it's a little bit like comparing apples and oranges. We've had some of their undergraduate students come here. The Bigelow Lab is a rare bluewater oceanographic institute. The University of Maine is a first-rate coastal and marine resource center."
Over time, he envisions more cooperation between the schools. "The environment for that is better now than it's ever been. Certainly it's better than when we started. We already have some connections with Bigelow labs, and we have a lot of connections with the Island Institute."
STANDING at a sorting tank, Carl Wilson -- one of Steneck's graduate students -- sifts samples of bottom sucked up earlier that day. He is looking for a lobster, a settled fourth-stage larvae from this year. Someone points to one in the corner of one of his trays. "Hey, that's it," he shouts, and calls over anyone who comes near. "We've got one," he says.
Wilson has been at the university for three years; he did his undergraduate work in New Hampshire. "This program has really taken off, even in the time I've been here," he said. "It nice to see that. It seems like we had a great program in forestry. A state like Maine ought to have a great program in marine science, too."

Subject: Colleges & universities; Curricula; Science education; Marine biology

Location: ME US New England

Company / organization: Name: University of Maine-Orono; SIC: 8221; Name: Maine Maritime Academy; SIC: 8221

Title: Two schools, one ocean and a sea of mysteries

Publication title: Maine Times; Portland, Me.

Volume: 29

Issue: 43

Pages: 3

Number of pages: 0

Publication year: 1997

Publication date: Aug 21, 1997

Publisher: Maine Times

Place of publication: Portland, Me.

Country of publication: United States, Portland, Me.

Publication subject: Environmental Studies

ISSN: 00250783

Source type: Newspapers

Language of publication: English

Document type: NEWSPAPER

Accession number: 98-02261

ProQuest document ID: 246888089

Document URL: https://search.proquest.com/docview/246888089?accountid=10457

Copyright: Copyright Maine Times Aug 21, 1997

Last updated: 2011-11-01

Database: Global Newsstream

____________________________________________________________

Two schools, one ocean and a sea of mysteries

Author: Weegar, Andrew K

Publication info: Maine Times ; Portland, Me. [Portland, Me]21 Aug 1997: 3. [Duplicate]

https://search.proquest.com/docview/246842284?accountid=10457

Abstract: AFTER only a few months of living in Maine, Matt Cusack is thinking about attending graduate school here. Cusack, who's from North Carolina, has been participating in a summer internship program run by the University of Maine. "I'd never been to Maine before, or even to New England," he said. "But I think I'll definitely be applying here."

Links: http://CX2EF4JW8J.search.serialssolutions.com/directLink?&amp;atitle=Two+schools%2C+one+ocean+and+a+sea+of+mysteries&amp;author=Weegar%2C+Andrew+K&amp;issn=00250783&amp;title=Maine+Times&amp;volume=29&amp;issue=43&amp;date=1997-08-21&amp;spage=3&amp;id=doi:&amp;sid=ProQ_ss&amp;genre=article

Full text:   AFTER only a few months of living in Maine, Matt Cusack is thinking about attending graduate school here. Cusack, who's from North Carolina, has been participating in a summer internship program run by the University of Maine. "I'd never been to Maine before, or even to New England," he said. "But I think I'll definitely be applying here."
UNTIL a few years ago, Maine had no widely recognized marine science program, and the research programs along the coast operated independently of each other. Relations between two state programs -- the University of Maine and Maine Maritime -- grew particularly frosty in the early 1990s, as both schools established undergraduate programs in marine science within a few years of each other.
At the time, Angus King, now governor, said it was "patently absurd" that the University of Maine did not have a marine resources program, and future Marine Resources Commissioner Robin Alden said, "Maine has an obligation to have a strong marine resources program that starts with an undergraduate degree and continues through graduate education."
The move toward creating a single School of Marine Sciences was first recommended by consultants hired by UM in 1991. Proponents listed two reasons for supporting the new school: First, it would bring together 70-odd professors already involved in marine research; second, it would make it easier for the school to apply for grants. The creation of the new school got powerful backing, including the state's two major business groups, the Maine Alliance and the Maine Chamber of Commerce, which have since merged.
Maine Maritime saw things differently. Officials at the school claimed that UM's program would be a duplication of effort, and would offer the same programs as its own Corning School of Ocean Studies. "A marine studies undergraduate major at Orono makes about as much sense as a forestry major at Castine," MMA President Leonard Tyler wrote to his board of trustees. Tyler protested that MMA had founded its own school after receiving assurances from the university it had no plans to do the same. What made the proposal to create a new marine studies program doubly controversial was that it came at a time when other programs at the school were facing downsizing and budget cuts.
Today, both undergraduate programs are drawing students, and both take pains to leave the past behind. John Barlow served as dean of the Corning School during the controversy, and now says "It's all just a matter of fact now. There's no sense rattling that cage. I think we can get enough good students to fill both programs."
Barlow said things at the Corning School "have come a long way in the last eight years. We have the faculty and the students. Our students are going out and getting good jobs. It's the right place for a marine program."
The school complemented its fleet of research vessels with the State of Maine, a vessel built by the U.S. Navy. "It gives us some tremendous opportunities to have such a huge modern vessel," said Barlow. "There probably isn't another marine program in the country with a ship like that."
Traditionally, programs at Maine Maritime have served the commercial maritime industry, and the degree programs have names like the Power Engineering Program, or the International Business and Logistics Program. "Our primary focus was to teach people how to be a ship's engineer, or how to navigate large commercial ships. It seemed like a natural step for us to take."
Establishing a marine science major at the Corning School did as much to change the look of Maine Maritime as the arrival of the State of Maine. "At least half of the students in the science program are female," Barlow said. "It's hard to recruit females for the engineering programs."
THE University of Maine has spent the past several years developing the curriculum for its undergraduate program, which was approved by trustees last year. "It is a four-year program with two tracks, one in physical sciences, one in biological sciences," said James Wilson, associate director of the School of Marine Sciences. "We have a very experienced faculty. The average years of teaching is probably about 15. The classes will all be taught by professors, and not by teaching assistants."
What Maine Maritime has, of course, and what the University of Maine does not, is immediately visible by a visit to either campus: the ocean. But the university has developed a strong marine laboratory at the Darling Center, a 150-acre campus with a flowing water ocean lab located on the Damariscotta River Estuary, about four miles from the Gulf of Maine. The undergraduate degree program will include one or two semesters at Darling.
"Until about 1992 it was a very sleepy little place," said Wilson. "That's changed. This summer there's something like 132 outside researchers from all over the world -- Chile, Japan, Germany -- and all over the U.S. coming in to use that laboratory."
A program at the center offers 40 undergraduate internships during the summer, and it also offers a number of one-week field trips. The center is building an 80-person dormitory, with most of the money raised by a group called Friends of the Gulf of Maine.
Wilson credits the activity at the center to its dean, Kevin Eckelbarger. "In five years he's turned that place from a not-so-bad lab into a place that's just bursting with intellectual power."
Before establishing its undergraduate program, the university offered several graduate degrees, and an undergraduate program in aquaculture. Since consolidating the school, there are now 35 graduate students, nearly all supported by research grants. "That group brings in about 20 to 25 percent of the research money coming into the university," said Wilson. "One really neat thing that's happening is by taking all these people from oceanography, physics, plant biology, all of a sudden, we're getting this explosion of interdisciplinary work that's coming up."
ANOTHER strength of the university's program has been a wealth of research of practical use to fishermen in the Gulf of Maine, at times drawing on topics suggested by fishermen themselves. Wilson is working on a project that came from "talking to fishermen about how local stocks of cod might develop in certain bays. it is possible that we may get physical and biological circumstances that retain larvae in a fairly limited area. If the biological conditions confirm what the fishermen are talking about, it could have an enormous impact, and may even mean we would have to change the way we manage -- not manage as if there was one big stock out there."
The number of research projects with applied uses is even more evident after a tour of the facility. Aside from general projects on global warming, beach erosion, and the geological and maritime history of New England, students study ways to successfully raise surf clams in aquaculture, and the ways shellfish absorb the dinoflagellate that causes red tide.
Bob Steneck is a full professor at the university, with an office at the Darling Center. On his wall is a picture of Hillary Clinton smiling at what looks like Czech President Vaclav Havel; on closer examination, it turns out to be Maine lobsterman Dave Cousins. Steneck works closely with lobster fishermen, and his work at the Darling Center is closely followed by the lobster industry. A graduate student at the university serves as a scientific liaison to lobstermen, while another works with urchin divers.
"I got my degree at Johns Hopkins, where they definitely look down their noses at anything applied," Steneck said. "I don't think that's the best approach. With limited funding, we've got to find ways to make the university's research seem relevant to more people."
Lobstermen, he said, "have been generous to a person" in supporting his work, and in turn, "We're trying to help them make decisions by demystifying the science."
Steneck's research has contributed a great deal to scientific understanding of lobster biology. "When I got started studying lobsters in 1982, nobody knew where the nursery grounds were," Steneck said. "Nobody knew what lobsters did early in life."
A researcher first identified the nursery grounds in 1987, and Steneck's work has documented the early life of lobsters, which go through four stages of development before they look like a lobster. This fourth stage drifts near the surface, moved by wind and ocean currents, before settling to the bottom in shallow areas. "In water 60 feet or deeper, they are very rare," says Steneck. "Even in shallow water, they are limited to cobble bottoms, where the young can find protection from predation. You'll find the young at a density of 10 to 12 per square meter in cobble bottom," he said. But cobble bottom is relatively limited on the coast, meaning that "from 2 to 10 percent of coastline is appropriate nursery ground."
For lobsters who settle on other areas, it's a short life. "We've done some experiments with tethered lobsters that show the median time to predation outside cobble is 15 minutes."
The mechanisms of lobster settlement, which Steneck is now studying, is the key to new recruitment in the population. "Lobster larval behavior probably contributes a lot to lobster landings," he said. "We're just beginning to unravel that now." His current work looks at the distribution of reproductive lobsters, "how that interfaces with ocean currents, and how that interfaces with settlement."
He is beginning to discover that settlement is also influenced by ocean temperatures. "That's important. It could mean that significant variations in lobster landings since the 1940s can be explained by variations in temperature in August when lobsters are settling." With temperatures conducive to lobster settling this year, "we'll know in about one month if settlement is up, and I predict it will be."
Although it may seem startling that something as familiar and as utilized as the Gulf of Maine could still harbor scientific mysteries, it can and does. Other research at the Darling Center studies creatures from microorganisms to fish, and Steneck is taking a closer look at the biology of sea urchins.
The history of fisheries on the coast is boom and bust.
The inshore fisheries for cod, pollock, and other species were largely extirpated earlier in this century, with the development of efficient motors to power vessels to chase the fish and refrigeration to send them to market. Although the evidence is largely circumstantial, lobsters probably benefited from the loss of groundfish, as the niche occupied by cod was filled by smaller species.
Some things are clear. "In essence, what we've done is move further and further down the food pyramid -- removing the cod and the pollock -- until we're primarily taking lobsters, and even some of the herbivores, like urchins."
The ripple effects in an ecosystem as a species is removed are difficult to document, however. But this is just what Steneck is now aiming to do with sea urchins. Off the coast of Maine, urchins fill a vital role in grazing kelp, and are efficient enough to keep large kelp beds from forming. What is unusual is that urchins are apparently the only species in the Gulf of Maine capable of doing this. "That is very unusual, even unique, to have an entire trophic level filled by just one species," said Steneck.
As the urchins have been removed, Steneck has documented a number of effects: First, the explosion of kelp beds off the coast. These, in turn, provide shelter for lobsters, and for some groundfish, like pollock. "This is one of the most striking examples of a human impact on an ecosystem we know of. We're starting to see more pollock than we've seen in a long time." The kelp also provides habitat to lobsters of near-harvestable size, particularly over ledge.
"We've got consistent data from our 15 years of lobster surveys to show we've had a tremendous increase in lobster habitat in that short time," said Steneck.
The one species that cannot thrive in these kelp beds, ironically, is urchins Mature beds harbor a number of parasites that devastate urchins trying to recolonize the beds. "In some areas in York County, we've seen 99 percent mortality in young urchins," said Steneck. "At this point, life is too short for me to study all of these things. I just live vicariously through my graduate students."
Beyond the goal of "using marine science as a way to develop mental agility in students," Steneck is hoping the work at the Darling Center and the university "will train the next generation of fish scientists. People who not only understand ecology, oceanography, but the lifestyle and culture of the harvesters."
Steneck said the success of the Darling Center speaks volumes about the need for marine education in Maine, and he said he doesn't worry about competition with Maine Maritime or the Bigelow Labs. "I never really saw the Maine Maritime program as a problem. To me it's a little bit like comparing apples and oranges. We've had some of their undergraduate students come here. The Bigelow Lab is a rare bluewater oceanographic institute. The University of Maine is a first-rate coastal and marine resource center."
Over time, he envisions more cooperation between the schools. "The environment for that is better now than it's ever been. Certainly it's better than when we started. We already have some connections with Bigelow labs, and we have a lot of connections with the Island Institute."
STANDING at a sorting tank, Carl Wilson -- one of Steneck's graduate students -- sifts samples of bottom sucked up earlier that day. He is looking for a lobster, a settled fourth-stage larvae from this year. Someone points to one in the corner of one of his trays. "Hey, that's it," he shouts, and calls over anyone who comes near. "We've got one," he says.
Wilson has been at the university for three years; he did his undergraduate work in New Hampshire. "This program has really taken off, even in the time I've been here," he said. "It nice to see that. It seems like we had a great program in forestry. A state like Maine ought to have a great program in marine science, too."

Subject: Colleges & universities; Curricula; Science education; Marine biology

Location: ME US New England

Company / organization: Name: University of Maine-Orono; SIC: 8221; Name: Maine Maritime Academy; SIC: 8221

Title: Two schools, one ocean and a sea of mysteries

Publication title: Maine Times; Portland, Me.

Volume: 29

Issue: 43

Pages: 3

Number of pages: 0

Publication year: 1997

Publication date: Aug 21, 1997

Publisher: Maine Times

Place of publication: Portland, Me.

Country of publication: United States, Portland, Me.

Publication subject: Environmental Studies

ISSN: 00250783

Source type: Newspapers

Language of publication: English

Document type: NEWSPAPER

Accession number: 98-02261

ProQuest document ID: 246842284

Document URL: https://search.proquest.com/docview/246842284?accountid=10457

Copyright: Copyright Maine Times Aug 21, 1997

Last updated: 2014-05-26

Database: Global Newsstream

____________________________________________________________

Atlantic sturgeon may be next endangered species battle

Author: Watts, Douglas

Publication info: Maine Times ; Portland, Me. [Portland, Me]17 July 1997: 10.

https://search.proquest.com/docview/246911776?accountid=10457

Abstract: The unique armor-like skin of the Atlantic sturgeon has protected it from predators for SO million years, but is proving helpless against humans.

Links: http://CX2EF4JW8J.search.serialssolutions.com/directLink?&amp;atitle=Atlantic+sturgeon+may+be+next+endangered+species+battle&amp;author=Watts%2C+Douglas&amp;issn=00250783&amp;title=Maine+Times&amp;volume=29&amp;issue=39&amp;date=1997-07-17&amp;spage=10&amp;id=doi:&amp;sid=ProQ_ss&amp;genre=article

Full text: The unique armor-like skin of the Atlantic sturgeon has protected it from predators for SO million years, but is proving helpless against humans.
These fish, which can reach 14 feet long, were once abundant in Maine rivers and the rest of the East Coast. In 1890, the U.S. catch was 9 million pounds. By 1995, the catch had dropped to a few hundred fish. According to biologist Mark Bain of Cornell University, the nation's last viable sturgeon run, in New York's Hudson River, is on the verge of collapse from over-fishing.
This news has spurred the Biodiversity Legal Foundation in Colorado to petition the federal government to declare the Atlantic sturgeon an endangered, species in its entire range -- from Florida to Maine's Kennebec River. Federal agencies have until September to act on the petition.
Jasper Carlton of the foundation said it acted because federal fisheries agencies have so far refused.
"This species is clearly in danger of extinction," said Carlton. "It has been decimated in every drainage it existed in."
The Kennebec is one of the few remaining U.S. rivers that have a spawning population of Atlantic sturgeon, said Thomas Squiers, a biologist with the Maine Department of Marine Resources. With a population of about 200 adults, the Kennebec is thought to have the fourth largest population left in the world.
Atlantic sturgeon live to be 60 years or older and can weigh more than 800 pounds. After spending their first five years in river estuaries and a decade or more in the ocean, the sturgeon stop eating and return to coastal rivers to spawn. Female Atlantic sturgeon do not reach sexual maturity until they are 20.
While they spend most of their time vacuuming mollusks off the ocean bottom, Atlantic sturgeon like to jump on their freshwater spawning runs. Seven-foot-long fish hurling themselves into the air are a frequent sight in downtown Augusta each summer.
Lack of funding for research has made the sturgeon something of a mystery fish in Maine waters.
"We have no clear idea of the Atlantic sturgeon population in the Kennebec, except it's very small," said Squiers, emphasizing that his estimate of 100 adults is really a guess.
According to John Field, the Anadromous Fish Coordinator for the Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission, there is no clear evidence to show the fish are successfully spawning in the Kennebec. "There's a lot of circumstantial evidence, in terms of big fish moving up and down the river, but no young fish have been recovered that I am aware of," Field said. He added that South Carolina "has several rivers that have shown young of the year, but in terms of churning out spawning biomass, the Hudson River is still king."
If Squiers' guess of 100 fish is close, then a small gill-net operation in South Gardiner in 1980 may have wiped out a quarter of the river's remaining population. In June of that year, two part-time commercial fishermen captured more than 30 Atlantic sturgeon and sold them to fish markets. Squiers said most were ripe males between five and six feet long. One of the egg-laden females was 40 years old.
The state shut down the fishery when the netters caught both sturgeon that had recently been tagged and released by state biologists. Since 1992, it has been illegal to possess any sturgeon of any size anywhere in the state.
Currently, the state has no position on whether. the Atlantic sturgeon should be listed, but it is calling for the removal of the Edwards Dam in Augusta to restore the sturgeon's prime spawning grounds between Augusta and Waterville. Atlantic sturgeon do not use fishways. The dam relicensing, however, is mired in controversy at the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, and a final decision on the dam may be years away.
A second sturgeon species native to the Kennebec, the shortnose, has been on the federal endangered species list since 1967. Though they've been studying the matter for some time, federal agencies have not acted on whether Atlantic salmon should be added to the list as well.

Subject: Endangered & extinct species; Fish

Location: San Diego CA US Pacific

Title: Atlantic sturgeon may be next endangered species battle

Publication title: Maine Times; Portland, Me.

Volume: 29

Issue: 39

Pages: 10

Number of pages: 0

Publication year: 1997

Publication date: Jul 17, 1997

Publisher: Maine Times

Place of publication: Portland, Me.

Country of publication: United States, Portland, Me.

Publication subject: Environmental Studies

ISSN: 00250783

Source type: Newspapers

Language of publication: English

Document type: NEWSPAPER

Accession number: 97-89883

ProQuest document ID: 246911776

Document URL: https://search.proquest.com/docview/246911776?accountid=10457

Copyright: Copyright Maine Times Jul 17, 1997

Last updated: 2011-11-01

Database: Global Newsstream

____________________________________________________________

Atlantic sturgeon may be next endangered species battle

Author: Watts, Douglas

Publication info: Maine Times ; Portland, Me. [Portland, Me]17 July 1997: 10. [Duplicate]

https://search.proquest.com/docview/246878445?accountid=10457

Abstract: The unique armor-like skin of the Atlantic sturgeon has protected it from predators for SO million years, but is proving helpless against humans.

Links: http://CX2EF4JW8J.search.serialssolutions.com/directLink?&amp;atitle=Atlantic+sturgeon+may+be+next+endangered+species+battle&amp;author=Watts%2C+Douglas&amp;issn=00250783&amp;title=Maine+Times&amp;volume=29&amp;issue=39&amp;date=1997-07-17&amp;spage=10&amp;id=doi:&amp;sid=ProQ_ss&amp;genre=article

Full text: The unique armor-like skin of the Atlantic sturgeon has protected it from predators for SO million years, but is proving helpless against humans.
These fish, which can reach 14 feet long, were once abundant in Maine rivers and the rest of the East Coast. In 1890, the U.S. catch was 9 million pounds. By 1995, the catch had dropped to a few hundred fish. According to biologist Mark Bain of Cornell University, the nation's last viable sturgeon run, in New York's Hudson River, is on the verge of collapse from over-fishing.
This news has spurred the Biodiversity Legal Foundation in Colorado to petition the federal government to declare the Atlantic sturgeon an endangered, species in its entire range -- from Florida to Maine's Kennebec River. Federal agencies have until September to act on the petition.
Jasper Carlton of the foundation said it acted because federal fisheries agencies have so far refused.
"This species is clearly in danger of extinction," said Carlton. "It has been decimated in every drainage it existed in."
The Kennebec is one of the few remaining U.S. rivers that have a spawning population of Atlantic sturgeon, said Thomas Squiers, a biologist with the Maine Department of Marine Resources. With a population of about 200 adults, the Kennebec is thought to have the fourth largest population left in the world.
Atlantic sturgeon live to be 60 years or older and can weigh more than 800 pounds. After spending their first five years in river estuaries and a decade or more in the ocean, the sturgeon stop eating and return to coastal rivers to spawn. Female Atlantic sturgeon do not reach sexual maturity until they are 20.
While they spend most of their time vacuuming mollusks off the ocean bottom, Atlantic sturgeon like to jump on their freshwater spawning runs. Seven-foot-long fish hurling themselves into the air are a frequent sight in downtown Augusta each summer.
Lack of funding for research has made the sturgeon something of a mystery fish in Maine waters.
"We have no clear idea of the Atlantic sturgeon population in the Kennebec, except it's very small," said Squiers, emphasizing that his estimate of 100 adults is really a guess.
According to John Field, the Anadromous Fish Coordinator for the Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission, there is no clear evidence to show the fish are successfully spawning in the Kennebec. "There's a lot of circumstantial evidence, in terms of big fish moving up and down the river, but no young fish have been recovered that I am aware of," Field said. He added that South Carolina "has several rivers that have shown young of the year, but in terms of churning out spawning biomass, the Hudson River is still king."
If Squiers' guess of 100 fish is close, then a small gill-net operation in South Gardiner in 1980 may have wiped out a quarter of the river's remaining population. In June of that year, two part-time commercial fishermen captured more than 30 Atlantic sturgeon and sold them to fish markets. Squiers said most were ripe males between five and six feet long. One of the egg-laden females was 40 years old.
The state shut down the fishery when the netters caught both sturgeon that had recently been tagged and released by state biologists. Since 1992, it has been illegal to possess any sturgeon of any size anywhere in the state.
Currently, the state has no position on whether. the Atlantic sturgeon should be listed, but it is calling for the removal of the Edwards Dam in Augusta to restore the sturgeon's prime spawning grounds between Augusta and Waterville. Atlantic sturgeon do not use fishways. The dam relicensing, however, is mired in controversy at the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, and a final decision on the dam may be years away.
A second sturgeon species native to the Kennebec, the shortnose, has been on the federal endangered species list since 1967. Though they've been studying the matter for some time, federal agencies have not acted on whether Atlantic salmon should be added to the list as well.

Subject: Endangered & extinct species; Fish

Location: San Diego CA US Pacific

Title: Atlantic sturgeon may be next endangered species battle

Publication title: Maine Times; Portland, Me.

Volume: 29

Issue: 39

Pages: 10

Number of pages: 0

Publication year: 1997

Publication date: Jul 17, 1997

Publisher: Maine Times

Place of publication: Portland, Me.

Country of publication: United States, Portland, Me.

Publication subject: Environmental Studies

ISSN: 00250783

Source type: Newspapers

Language of publication: English

Document type: NEWSPAPER

Accession number: 97-89883

ProQuest document ID: 246878445

Document URL: https://search.proquest.com/docview/246878445?accountid=10457

Copyright: Copyright Maine Times Jul 17, 1997

Last updated: 2011-11-01

Database: Global Newsstream

____________________________________________________________

Preparation helped keep oil spill damage from being worse

Author: Chutchian, Kenneth Z

Publication info: Maine Times ; Portland, Me. [Portland, Me]03 Oct 1996: 6.

https://search.proquest.com/docview/246912353?accountid=10457

Abstract: The massive oil spill which struck Portland Harbor after a tanker collided with the Million Dollar Bridge is still being evaluated, but the early estimates are that it could have been a lot worse.

Links: http://CX2EF4JW8J.search.serialssolutions.com/directLink?&amp;atitle=Preparation+helped+keep+oil+spill+damage+from+being+worse&amp;author=Chutchian%2C+Kenneth+Z&amp;issn=00250783&amp;title=Maine+Times&amp;volume=28&amp;issue=50&amp;date=1996-10-03&amp;spage=6&amp;id=doi:&amp;sid=ProQ_ss&amp;genre=article

Full text:   The massive oil spill which struck Portland Harbor after a tanker collided with the Million Dollar Bridge is still being evaluated, but the early estimates are that it could have been a lot worse.
The current groundwork for containing oil spills was laid about six years ago; aggressive responses to major oil spills off the coast of Maine were authorized then by the Legislature. An earlier law, also designed by the state's Department of Environmental Protection, served as a model for Sen. George Mitchell's national legislation which was swiftly enacted after the Exxon Valdez disaster in Alaska. Under that legislation, all tankers will have to have double hulls by early in the 21st century. The tanker involved in the Portland spill did not have a double hull.
On Monday, a federal investigator said the crash came after the local pilot, James Mooney, gave a wrong directional command, "hard right," rather than "hard left," just as the tanker was maneuvering to fit through the bridge's narrow opening. The passage is only 95 feet wide, and the Liberian-registry tanker measures 85 feet across. About 176,000 gallons of oil were spilled.
Reports of environmental damage are still spotty. Rob Bryan, who checked the Maine Audubon Society's Fore River Sanctuary on Monday, said the oil had reached the marsh, but that significant damage might have been averted for the delicate inland salt marsh because tall spartina grass was acting as a barrrier.
Experts say that salt marsh damage is relatively difficult to detect and hard to rectify; unlike oil-soaked sea birds, of which there were few this time around, marshes may take years to recover. Shellfish like mussels are also extremely sensitive to contamination.
Not everyone who worked on the landmark state law for DEP is still around. Al Prysunka, the former director of DEP's bureau of hazardous materials; left state government last year after finding himself at odds with leaders of the King administration over environmental policy.
Prysunka was one of the DEP's point men when a storage tank at Brunswick Naval Air Station leaked 63,000 gallons of jet fuel into a marsh and parts of Merrymeeting Bay in 1993. Maine did its own tightening up of oil spill response regulations in the aftermath of the Exxon Valdez spill in 1989. It was a fine-tuning of a system that works primarily on inland spills, Prysunka said.
New policies and additional federal funding made it possible to have the equipment in place to react quickly to the tanker spill in Portland Harbor last week. "You could spend $10 million, $20 million pick a number, and it wouldn't be enough for a major oil spill," Prysunka said. But the new money did help, he added.
The Exxon Valdez disaster brought additional federal money to states to deal with oil spills, and the Legislature created an oil spill study commission of lawmakers, oil industry representatives, environmental groups and cleanup contractors from private industry. The task force as chaired by former state Rep. Susan Farasworth of Hallowell, who has cited it as a highlight of her six years in the Legislature, even though there was little publicity or news coverage for the commission's work at the time.
During that period, oil companies pooled their money to-create the Marine Spill Response Corp. The DEP set up a state-of-the-art ocean mapping system to better coordinate its efforts with the U.S. Coast Guard, which is the primary government responder to oil spills.
Because Maine already had some of the nation's toughest marine resource protection laws on the books before the study commission was created, it was better positioned than most states to address issues such as equipment needs, coordination of information, and the extent of Maine's legal authority to take specific actions.
"I viewed the state of Maine's role as one of support," Prysunka said. "We deal with smaller spills...every year, there are hundreds of inland and coastal spills of a much smaller magnitude. The Coast Guard becomes the lead in big spills. That kind of coordination took place," he said, after the oil spill study commission was created.
Prysunka said the businesses involved should take some financial responsibility for such cleanups.
U.S. Senate candidate John Rensenbrink, a Green Party member, rook the opportunity to call for "a clearly defined and strongly enforced set of requirements designed to hold corporations accountable for all of the costs associated with such a disaster--including emergency response work, all environmental clean-up and the lost income of lobstermen, fishermen and other marine-related industries."
When asked what more can be done to ensure effective responses to oil spills, Prysunka said, "It's still the oil industry's responsibility."

Subject: Oil spills; Environmental impact; Environmental policy; Management of crises; State laws

Location: Portland ME US New England

Company / organization: Name: Department of Environmental Protection-Maine; SIC: 9511

Title: Preparation helped keep oil spill damage from being worse

Publication title: Maine Times; Portland, Me.

Volume: 28

Issue: 50

Pages: 6

Number of pages: 0

Publication year: 1996

Publication date: Oct 03, 1996

Publisher: Maine Times

Place of publication: Portland, Me.

Country of publication: United States, Portland, Me.

Publication subject: Environmental Studies

ISSN: 00250783

Source type: Newspapers

Language of publication: English

Document type: NEWSPAPER

Accession number: 97-03887

ProQuest document ID: 246912353

Document URL: https://search.proquest.com/docview/246912353?accountid=10457

Copyright: Copyright Maine Times Oct 03, 1996

Last updated: 2014-05-21

Database: Global Newsstream

____________________________________________________________

Fishy tomatoes and hot potatoes: The tomato in your supermarket may have genes in it from a flounder. Wouldn't you like to know that?

Author: Weegar, Andrew K

Publication info: Maine Times ; Portland, Me. [Portland, Me]31 Mar 1995: 11.

https://search.proquest.com/docview/246923980?accountid=10457

Abstract: BEGINNING IN APRIL, Mainers will be able to walk into a grocery store and buy what by most accounts is a pretty tasty tomato. Except for a small label on the package, they would never guess this tomato had its genes that control softening taken out, turned backward, and placed back in. Within the next few years, if Monsanto Corp. has its way, that tomato will be joined on the shelves by a potato that contains high amounts of a bacterial protein -- also introduced through genetic engineering -- that is poisonous to insects, including the Colorado potato beetle. This potato, however, might not be labeled. (excerpt)

Links: http://CX2EF4JW8J.search.serialssolutions.com/directLink?&amp;atitle=Fishy+tomatoes+and+hot+potatoes%3A+The+tomato+in+your+supermarket+may+have+genes+in+it+from+a+flounder.+Wouldn%27t+you+like+to+know+that%3F&amp;author=Weegar%2C+Andrew+K&amp;issn=00250783&amp;title=Maine+Times&amp;volume=27&amp;issue=25&amp;date=1995-03-31&amp;spage=11&amp;id=doi:&amp;sid=ProQ_ss&amp;genre=article

Full text:   BEGINNING IN APRIL, Mainers will be able to walk into a grocery store and buy what by most accounts is a pretty tasty tomato. Except for a small label on the package, they would never guess this tomato had its genes that control softening taken out, turned backward, and placed back in.
Within the next few years, if Monsanto Corp. has its way, that tomato will be joined on the shelves by a potato that contains high amounts of a bacterial protein -- also introduced through genetic engineering -- that is poisonous to insects, including the Colorado potato beetle. This potato, however, might not be labeled.
Despite the unusual pedigrees of bioengineered products, supporters say they are no different than non-engineered food, and so far their position has the backing of the federal Food and Drug Administration.
Not everyone agrees, and a host of objections are being raised to proposed. bioengineered products in Maine, many of them funneled through a special panel. The Maine Commission on Biotechnology recently was abolished after a disagreement over its rulemaking authority, and a new commission was appointed by the Legislature. Brunswick biologist John Albright serves on what he calls the "reengineered" committee, which is charged with examining how other states have regulated biotechnology and proposing draft legislation for Maine.
"A lot of what we've considered so far has to do with food testing and labeling," Albright says.
Others question whether Monsanto's potato, by building insect resistance, will weaken one of the most effective control methods now used for potato beetle.
"We haven't even addressed some of the other issues, like potential escapes into the wild," Albright adds.
A FEW GENERATIONS before the discovery of DNA, Ralph Waldo Emerson wrote that "all thoughts of a turtle are turtles, and of a rabbit, rabbits." For conventional agriculture, this has been an assumed comfort: Although a farmer can cross his rabbits to select for size, appearance, color or any other trait, he at least knows they will not mate with passing turtles -- or with the cows.
From the standpoint of modern genetics, the preference of turtles for turtles is a minor inconvenience. Each animal has an extraordinary amount of genetic material -- the biologist E.O. Wilson, for example, notes that if the genetic information in a house mouse were transcribed, it would fill all 15 editions of the Encyclopedia Brittannica published since 1768. Much of this genetic material is shared by all living things (there are genes in humans that are also found in rice), while some is specific to species and individuals, and controls specific functions.
Researchers have grown increasingly adept at browsing through this genetic library and selecting certain volumes. Recently, for example, researchers identified the genes in mustard plants that fight bacterial infection, a gene in tobacco that wards off ruses, and the gene in corn that controls growth. This information is useful not only to produce new varieties of these plants: It is becoming increasingly easy to move genes from one plant to another, or to an animal.
Thus, in the brave new world of biotechnology, the rabbits aren't just mating with turtles -- they're mating with the spinach. There rue pigs with human genes and, in one of the more publicized advances, researchers have isolated a gene that produces an antifreeze substance in flounder and introduced it into tomatoes to help prevent freezing.
Maine's first major brush with biotechnology came two years ago, when Monsanto sought to market its bovine growth hormone to Maine dairy farmers. Bills seeking to ban the synthetic hormone and, failing that, require milk labeling went nowhere. But legislators did approve a public registration system that, so far, has discouraged any Maine farmer from using the hormone on his cows and any Maine dairy from knowingly selling milk from BGH-treated cows.
The controversy over agricultural biotechnology reawakened this spring after Monsanto announced it had conducted field trials on a potato that contains genes from a bacteria that produces a common insecticide. Bacillus thuringiensis, or Bt, produces a protein used to control various insects, including the Colorado potato beetle common in northern Maine. In the Monsanto potato, the chromosome sequence that produces the protein has been spliced into the potato at levels nearly 100 times the dosage that would be sprayed on plan.
Bt is widely considered a safe pest control, and it is one of several control methods used even by organic growers. Unlike most other pesticides, which disrupt the nerve function of insects, the Bt protein disrupts their digestion, and tests have shown it has no effect on other animals.
Its presence in the potato has nonetheless raised concerns. Current state and federal taws, for example, do not require that Bt be listed on the label, so, critics say, there's no way for a consumer to know if they are purchasing a potato with the Bt protein.
So far, the Food and Drug Administration has been slow to regulate biotechnology: In most cases the agency does not classify engineered genetic material as a food additive, which means the material does not appear on the product label.
"As long as they don't have a function that is toxic, or they are readily digestible, we would not consider them an additive," says the FDA's James Maryanski.
FDA rules even leave it up to companies to notify them of any bioengineering work they are doing. Critics of this approach claim it leaves too much to the good will of industry, but Maryanski defends the FDA's record, noting that allowing industry to notify the FDA is an approach used on most other new products and that industry research methodologies must pass numerous scientific reviews. "While it seems we are leaving a lot to industry to decide," says Maryanksi, "the system works because no producer or distributor is going to buy something that they are not sure will meet the law."
Many observers say that biotechnology is not just any new product.
"It is fundamentally different from classical plant breeding in that organisms that are not sexually compatible can now be brought together," says Douglas Hopkins, a lawyer for the Environmental Defense Fund who tracks biotechnology. "It was never before possible for me to go out and buy a tomato that had genes from a banana in it. It would be now."
Some states, including Maine, have stepped in to fill the void of leadership left by the FDA. A bill introduced by Rep. Conrad Heeschen (D-Wilton) would have required that foods that contain genetically engineered material clearly list the source of the introduced material and the reason it was introduced.
At a hearing on the bill, Blue Hill resident Jean Hay sliced open three potatoes and put a dab of butter on one, some sour cream on another. On the third she poured some M1 (a commercial brand of Bt) from a 5-gallon can. Then she wrapped each potato in aluminum foil and asked committee members to take their pick.
"No one ate the Bt potato," she says.
Backers of Heeschen's bill find it ironic that current laws do not require that a potato containing a protein used in an insecticide should be identified in a product, while under other FDA rules food additives like coloring, salt or sugar need to be listed.
"If you add sugar to a can of peaches, you need to list that on the can," says Nancy Ross, president of the Maine Organic Farmer and Gardeners Association (MOFGA). "If you add it to the peach through genetic engineering, you don't have to list it"
Heeschen's bill has some strong opponents, including the Maine Department of Agriculture and the Maine Potato' Board. In his testimony for the department, Carl Flora said that biotechnology does not offer any new health or safety concerns. Dave Lavway, executive director of the Maine Potato Board, worries about the effect labeling would have on Maine products.
"We're not sure but it would frighten consumers off for no good reason," says Lavway. "And it would put growers at a distinct disadvantage, unless other states did the same thing."
"I personally have mixed feelings about labeling," says Rob Johnston, the owner of Johnny's Selected Seeds in Albion, who sits with Albright on the Legislature-appointed biotechnology commission. "Anything that involves more red tape for a grower involves more expense," Johnston says. "Small farms already lose track of what varieties are in their fields. They wouldn't be allowed to lose track if there was a labeling law. It's one more thing they have to do, and farming is unprofitable enough as it is."
Ross and others point out that it may be important to some consumers to know if their food is genetically engineered -- observant Jews might not want their food to contain genes from pigs, for example.
"Right now, we haven't made up our minds on that," says the FDA's Maryanski, adding that the FDA's labeling authority "is not a right to know. It's important to some people whether union workers were used in picking and processing the food. That might be information someone would want, but we're not going to require that."
The FDA does require genetic material to be identified if it comes from a known allergen such as nuts, shellfish or dairy products. But the FDA does not require labeling if the gene comes from a minor allergen, such as bananas. Maryanski says minor allergens do not produce severe effects, and that they, too, might be listed -- the agency is considering regulations on a case-by-case basis.
But Maryanski concedes that Calgene's Flavr Savr tomato (the one with its softening genes turned askew, not with the flounder genes), the first genetically engineered product reviewed by the FDA, could have come to market with no labeling, although the manufacturer chose to identify it as genetically engineered. The tomato, already available in other parts of the country, will appear on shelves in Maine in the next few weeks.
"We'll stock them when they're available, and I believe they'll be available the first week in April," says Gary Argiropoulos, the vegetable manager for Hannaford Bros., which operates Shop n' Save supermarkets. Shop 'n Save stores will identify the tomatoes as genetically engineered.
"Right now our company policy is if we have anything that's genetically modified, we're going to sigh it, so people know what they're getting," says Agiropoulos. "It's not all negative. I want to get it marked so that if people like it they can t it again."
In the end, opponents of the bill prevailed. Maine's Biotechnology Commission recommended the bill be held over until the next session, but the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry voted to kill the bill by a vote of 11 to 2.
BEYOND THE ISSUES of consumer health and choice, critics of bioengineered foods have other concerns, arguing that the result of bioengineering technology will be to make farmers more dependent on purchased inputs, such as chemical pesticides and herbicides.
A recent report by the Union of Concerned Scientists, for example, says that 57 percent of al bioengineering work has been directed toward making plants more herbicide-resistant. About 1,100 crops have. been considered by the FDA for field testing; and one-third of those are herbicide-resistant crops.
"This means producing plants that can withstand types and amounts of herbicides that would normally kill them," says Hopkins.
This prompts a laugh from Stewart Smith, a University of Maine economist and a former Maine commissioner of agriculture. "That builds the inputs very quickly. Not only do you purchase the resistant seed, but then you turn around and purchase larger amounts of herbicide."
It is unclear how much Monsanto's cost to farmers for the bioengineered potato will be in relation to other seed potatoes or pesticide bills the g-grower would otherwise incur.
Ironically, some charge that Monsanto's potato, which the company says will lessen the need for chemical pesticides, may in the long run make chemicals even more necessary. reason is simple: Because the plants contain 50 percent more of the Bt protein than is required to kill 95 percent of the population, the only beetles that will survive will be those resistant to Bt.
"It's a continuation of that chemical treadmill, and it probably even speeds it up," says Smith.
"Resistance is the evil problem out there," says Randy Alford, the chair of the Entomology Department at the University of Maine. "It's coming; the question is, when?"
Alford says the Colorado potato beetle has proven to be one of the "four or five" most adaptable insects at developing resistance, noting that potato beetles in a Michigan lab already have shown resistance to Bt.
"We have never developed a control strategy it hasn't developed a resistance to. Not only did they not last a year or two; in some cases, the beetle already had the metabolic capacity to overcome it when it was introduced." Monsanto has proposed that farmers plant swaths of the non-transgenic potatoes as a kind of sacrificial offering to the beetles, allowing them to breed with any beetles that survive on the transgenic potato and lessen the resistance of succeeding generations. This is enough to earn the backing of the Maine Potato Board.
"What there needs to be is a resistance management plan," says Lavway. "The potato beetle has proven to be a very resilient bug, but with a plan in place, we're not concerned."
While Alford says the plan may work, he sees two problems with this strategy: It is extra work for farmers, so they may not all do it; and there are problems with planting large areas of potatoes left untreated. "There are other insect-borne diseases we need to be concerned about."
Alford says Monsanto first announced its intention to grow this potato in the fall of 1992, allowing entomologists only two years to study it. The Maine Potato Board says there will be less than 1,000 acres planted this year, and the potato will go into -production in 1996.
"Why can't we be given the chance to be thoughtful about this?" says Alford. "That's the $100 million question. We don't have the policies in place yet to deal with this."
Those concerned over the use of the Monsanto potato may soon have company. "Every major crop plant in the U.S. is under some stage of development for Bt,' says Douglas Hopkins.
"Bt as a class [of insecticides is] a wonderful and new approach," says Alford. But if the potato boosts resistance in the beetles, then growers would "lose that whole class and other related classes by this one deployment. That's an alarmist view, but don't be surprised with this insect. It lives up to its reputation. It always has."
There are other changes in store for the potato.
"There's a potato with higher specific gravity that uses less oil to fry and sits up straight in a package," says Lance Morrow, an area crop specialist with the University of Maine Cooperative Extension. "There's another one that is resistant to a common potato virus."
Do critics of bioengineering see an appropriate direction for the. technology?
"I think there is, and I'm becoming more and more convinced it's not toward eliminating pests," says Stewart Smith. "In the long term, we've got to learn to manage agricultural ecosystems."
Smith mentions the need for higher-energy forage crops that could lessen New England's dependence on imported grain. MOFGA's Nancy Ross agrees, but she demurs when asked if higher-yield, lower-input varieties would be an acceptable aim of biotechnology.
"You have to evaluate everything individually," Ross says. "If 10 years ago someone had said we could develop a potato that was resistant to Colorado potato beetle, I would have said 'great' As a matter of fact, a lot of organic growers said that when this potato was first introduced."

Subject: Product lines; Packaging; New England; Legislation; Labeling; Biotechnology; Agriculture

Location: US Portland ME

Company / organization: Name: Monsanto Co; Ticker: MTC; SIC: 2869, 2819; DUNS: 00-626-6803; Name: FDA; SIC: 9400; DUNS: 13-818-2175

Classification: 8641: Pharmaceuticals industry; 8400: Agriculture industry; 7500: Product planning & development; 4320: Legislation

Title: Fishy tomatoes and hot potatoes: The tomato in your supermarket may have genes in it from a flounder. Wouldn't you like to know that?

Publication title: Maine Times; Portland, Me.

Volume: 27

Issue: 25

Pages: 11

Number of pages: 0

Publication year: 1995

Publication date: Mar 31, 1995

Section: 1

Publisher: Maine Times

Place of publication: Portland, Me.

Country of publication: United States, Portland, Me.

Publication subject: Environmental Studies

ISSN: 00250783

Source type: Newspapers

Language of publication: English

Document type: NEWSPAPER

Accession number: 95-43112

ProQuest document ID: 246923980

Document URL: https://search.proquest.com/docview/246923980?accountid=10457

Copyright: Copyright Maine Times Mar 31, 1995

Last updated: 2014-05-23

Database: Global Newsstream

____________________________________________________________

Ban on seal killing takes a bite out of aquaculture

Author: Austin, Phyllis

Publication info: Maine Times ; Portland, Me. [Portland, Me]30 Mar 1995: 7.

https://search.proquest.com/docview/246912578?accountid=10457

Abstract: In the Passamaquoddy Bay waters that divide Maine and Canada, New Brunswick salmon farmers can legally shoot seals damaging fish stocks. But as of March 3, Maine growers are prohibited from killing destructive seals, even if the animal is inside a salmon pen eating one fish after another. An amendment to the Marine Mammal Protection Act (MMPA) makes it illegal to shoot seals. "We expect it to make our [growers'] lives more difficult," says Michael Hastings, director of the Maine-Aquaculture Association, which opposed the new rule. "It's impossible to predict the impact." (excerpt)

Links: http://CX2EF4JW8J.search.serialssolutions.com/directLink?&amp;atitle=Ban+on+seal+killing+takes+a+bite+out+of+aquaculture&amp;author=Austin%2C+Phyllis&amp;issn=00250783&amp;title=Maine+Times&amp;volume=27&amp;issue=24&amp;date=1995-03-30&amp;spage=7&amp;id=doi:&amp;sid=ProQ_ss&amp;genre=article

Full text:   In the Passamaquoddy Bay waters that divide Maine and Canada, New Brunswick salmon farmers can legally shoot seals damaging fish stocks. But as of March 3, Maine growers are prohibited from killing destructive seals, even if the animal is inside a salmon pen eating one fish after another.
An amendment to the Marine Mammal Protection Act (MMPA) makes it illegal to shoot seals. "We expect it to make our [growers'] lives more difficult," says Michael Hastings, director of the Maine-Aquaculture Association, which opposed the new rule. "It's impossible to predict the impact."
Most of the large Maine growers have already invested in expensive acoustical devices to try to ward off hungry harbor and gray seals, says Hastings, adding, "Some of the smaller farmers close to the [major operations] get the advantage" of acoustical deterrence. In the past, if that non-lethal method failed, growers could, as a last resort, shoot the seal. Now, anyone caught intentionally killing or seriously injuring a seal will be subject to fines of up to $20,000 per incident and/or up to one year of jail time.
The regulation applies not only to seals and salmon farmers but to all marine mammals and commercial fishermen. However, salmon farming is the only fishery on the East Coast faced with the need to occasionally kill seals intentionally to reduce their economic losses. Marine mammals killed in other fisheries are considered by catch, since the animals unintentionally become tangled in gear being used to harvest target fish or shellfish.
The only exception to the seal protection rule is when shooting is "imminently necessary in self-defense or to save the life of another person in immediate danger." In such a case, the fishermen or farmer must report the self-defense action to the National Marine Fisheries Service within 48 hours of the conclusion of the fishing trip.
Hastings says there are "no good figures" on the number of seals killed annually by Maine growers in the past; his guess is fewer than 100. Insurance companies report that seal predation has been the leading cause of salmon farm loss claims. A study by a University of Maine professor says seals have increased in the Gulf of Maine from about 14,000 a decade ago to between 20,000 and 30,000 today.
Seals are the biggest threat to caged salmon during the cold months, when the food supply is limited. "They are very clever creatures," Hastings says. They "are large and very hard to manage" when they get into pens and start eating the fish.
Cages typically contain around 4,000 salmon, and when a seal pokes a hole through the net enclosure, many of the fish swim free. One of the major issues between aquaculturists and environmentalists is the potential for genetic crossing created by the escape of domestic salmon into rivers with wild salmon runs.
Hastings says is hard for Maine growers to sit back, unable to protect their "crop," while Canadian growers can obtain a permit to shoot destructive seals and save their investment. Better insight into Canadian regulations on seals will come, he says, at a March 224 meeting in Eastport between salmon farmers, regulators and environmentalists.

Subject: Restrictions; New England; New Brunswick; Natural resources; Legislation; Fisheries; Aquaculture

Location: US ME

Classification: 8400: Agriculture industry; 4320: Legislation; 1530: Natural resources

Title: Ban on seal killing takes a bite out of aquaculture

Publication title: Maine Times; Portland, Me.

Volume: 27

Issue: 24

Pages: 7

Number of pages: 0

Publication year: 1995

Publication date: Mar 30, 1995

Section: 1

Publisher: Maine Times

Place of publication: Portland, Me.

Country of publication: United States, Portland, Me.

Publication subject: Environmental Studies

ISSN: 00250783

Source type: Newspapers

Language of publication: English

Document type: NEWSPAPER

Accession number: 95-41020

ProQuest document ID: 246912578

Document URL: https://search.proquest.com/docview/246912578?accountid=10457

Copyright: Copyright Maine Times Mar 30, 1995

Last updated: 2014-05-23

Database: Global Newsstream

____________________________________________________________

The mussel man of Clarks Cove

Author: Beem, Edgar Allen

Publication info: Maine Times ; Portland, Me. [Portland, Me]06 Jan 1995: 2.

https://search.proquest.com/docview/246907477?accountid=10457

Abstract: ED MYERS WORKS the waterfront--both literally and figuratively. At 77, he is a gentleman of pragmatic nature, catholic interests and liberal persuasion. Among the roles he plays in the life of coastal Maine are that of pioneering aquaculturist, waterfront commentator, local wharfinger, supply minister, peace activist, handicapped advocate, public citizen, prison missionary and registered Republican. Of all of these designations, it was this last that gave us initial pause. Ed Myers is a Republican!? (excerpt)

Links: http://CX2EF4JW8J.search.serialssolutions.com/directLink?&amp;atitle=The+mussel+man+of+Clarks+Cove&amp;author=Beem%2C+Edgar+Allen&amp;issn=00250783&amp;title=Maine+Times&amp;volume=27&amp;issue=13&amp;date=1995-01-06&amp;spage=2&amp;id=doi:&amp;sid=ProQ_ss&amp;genre=article

Full text:   ED MYERS WORKS the waterfront--both literally and figuratively. At 77, he is a gentleman of pragmatic nature, catholic interests and liberal persuasion. Among the roles he plays in the life of coastal Maine are that of pioneering aquaculturist, waterfront commentator, local wharfinger, supply minister, peace activist, handicapped advocate, public citizen, prison missionary and registered Republican.
Of all of these designations, it was this last that gave us initial pause.
Ed Myers is a Republican!?
"The Republican Party used to be the refuge for individualism, not rugged but charitable in the broadest sense," he explains. "The gang of brigands, thieves, image contorters, and imposers of the religious Right is not the Republican Party. The Democrats believe there is a federal solution for everything and I can't go along with that, so I am staying in the Republican camp and waiting for real service to come back."
So just when years of Reagan-Bush followed by days of Rush & Newt & Jesse had us convinced that all Republicans were mean-spirited guardians of capitalist self-interest, along comes Ed Myers to remind us that compassion for one's fellow humans is not the exclusive province of tax-and-spend Democrats. As we sail into 1995 looking for politicians, both state and federal, to move beyond partisanship to problem-solving, we therefore offer up the life of Edward A. Myers as an example of how charitable individualism can serve the common good.
Of course, we should have known Ed Myers' party affiliation just by looking at him. Anyone (other than an architect) who wears a bow tie night and day is probably a Republican. Even when working around his cluttered waterfront office and wharf on Clarks Cove in South Bristol, Myers sports a natty bow tie and immaculate white shirt beneath his flannels, down jacket and Wellingtons. It's a habit of 60 years he says he just can't break, though being a thoroughly practical man, he insists the little bow keeps his neck warm.
Clarks Cove is both the focus of Ed Myers' commercial past life as a mussel farmer and the source of much of what he writes in his column for the Island Institute's Working Waterfront. Everything in the cove, from the wharf and outbuildings to the scow at the dock, is gray, weathered and wooden, speaking to both the power of the elements and the history of the cove His wharf, Myers notes, was once a steamboat stop along the river route from Christmas Cove to Damariscotta. His guesthouse was once an alewife smokehouse. Clarks Cove also had a brickyard and an ice house at the turn of the century.
As the century sets to turn again, Clarks Cove and Myers' wharf are now busy with other human enterprises. Lobster traps are piled on the wharf. Floating cars of cultured oysters stand just off the dock. And the cove itself is dotted with white plastic barrels that once brought Coke syrup from Puerto Rico to Boston and now support suspended columns of young mussels.
"This," says Myers, surveying the wharf and cove, "is the working waterfront."
Pioneering mussel man
In 1974, Ed Myers pioneered mussel farming in Maine when he took out the state's first aquaculture license. Having previously been in the mail-order seafood business, Myers rose to the bait in 1973 when Richard Lutz, a researcher at the nearby Darling Center, developed a method of determining the age of mussels.
"If you could determine the age of mussels," Myers explains, "you could tell whether they had pearls--a big deterrent to the sale of wild mussels."
Following a trip to Spain where he studied the suspended mussel culture of Galicia, Myers established his own Abandon Farm mussel farm in Clarks Cove. But though his 1981 monograph The Husbandry of Mussels in a Maine Estuary became the blueprint for a successful mussel farming industry on Prince Edward Island, Myers' own Abandon Farm was never a financial success. In his best year, dealing mussels to eight Boston restaurants, Myers harvested $60,000 worth of mussels and lost $10,000.
"The thing I expected," explains Myers, "was that 10 other people would go into mussel farming between Small Point and Port Clyde--and that's exactly what happened on Prince Edward Island. With 10 farmers, you can have a central cleaning place and a single marketing arm."
As it was, the overhead was simply too high to support a single mussel farm. In 1993, Myers turned over management of Abandon Farm to his neighbor Bill Mook, who operates it in conjunction with his own Mook Sea Farm oyster farm, thus diversifying the crop and spreading out the overhead.
"Monoculture is wrong," concludes Myers. "One product is not the way to go. The salmon guys are proof of that."
Profit, we suspected, was never Ed Myers' ultimate goal in mussel farming, a suspicion he confirmed in a follow-up letter the day after our visit.
"The mussel operation had to be continued here until the right formula was found. Or the right person to do it, like Bill Mook. Temporarily uneconomic, but raising a standard and staying with it. Not noble, just necessary. The U.S. does not need aquaculture, but it has the resources to do a lot of work for extension to protein-poor regions. There are no boundaries anymore."
Ed Myers, an Ivy Leaguer from New Jersey, crossed a lot of personal and professional boundaries, however, en route to becoming a mollusk rancher in Maine. He is impatient discussing his childhood, as though it were so much ancient history; yet it was as a first-grader in Hillside, N.J., that Myers began to develop the acute sense of empathy that defined his later life.
When a caravan of gypsies settled in a field near his home, Myers was suddenly promoted from the first to the third grade in order to make room in the school for the gypsy children.
"I think it turned me to a sympathy for the underdog," he says. "I was always two years younger than everyone else. When my classmates had Model T's, I still had a bicycle."
After graduating high school at 16, Myers attended Exeter for a year before enrolling at Princeton (Class of '38) where he majored in philosophy, "the science of unanswered questions." Myers' senior thesis at Princeton was on "Totalitarianism and Its Effect on the Individual," and he did the field research for the paper while traveling in Hitler's Germany during the summer of 1937.
Another defining moment in Myers' young life came one day when he and his college roommate were cycling down a quiet country lane and came face to muzzle with two Nazi machine gunners.
"We were at the back entrance of Dachau."
Of his experience in prewar Germany, Myers says: "When you're a junior at Princeton, you're welcome anywhere. Then you realize that it's been decided by one bunch of people that another bunch of people are unwelcome, and not only are they unwelcome, but they are going to kill them. That sharpens the mind a bit."
Brand-new '39 Plymouth
After graduating from Princeton, Myers spent the next few years traveling all over the South peddling Vick's Vapo-Rub and cough drops to drugstores. Another turning point in his life occurred when, in order to secure an order, he purchased a raffle ticket at a drugstore in Virginia and won a brand-new 1939 Plymouth.
"My life changed," says Myers. "At that time I was making $100 a month. I took the Plymouth back to New York City and sold it for $500. Being rich, I could now get married."
In 1940, Myers married Julia Booth, a young woman he had met in Christmas Cove where his family and hers summered.
From 1942 until 1949, Myers worked as a fund-raiser at Princeton, an academic career interrupted for a year in 1945 while he served in the Army. He now credits his Army experience with instilling in him a deep skepticism about governmental authority.
"It was the first time," Myers says, "that I realized the government could lie to me in a fairly significant way."
He now looks at the bombing of Hiroshima as the government's biggest lie of the war. Where popular history tends to record Hiroshima as the deciding factor in the Japanese surrender, Myers says a more careful reading of history indicates that Japan had already decided to surrender before the bomb was dropped.
"The war was over!" he says adamantly. "Then we went and did what we did. It was not very sensible."
In 1949, having seen his hometown of Hillside swallowed up by Newark and Elizabeth and bucolic Princeton become squeezed between New York and Philadelphia, Myers decided to move his family to Maine.
"Those were primitive days," he says. "I came to the very simple conclusion that the way you survive in Maine is to import money. That's why I started a mail-order business."
During the 1950s and '60s, Myers operated Saltwater Farm, shipping Maine clams and lobsters all over the world. But changing transportation patterns eventually complicated his business life. In 1959, rail service to Damariscotta was discontinued. In 1965, in order to bypass delays getting perishable seafood from Portland to Boston by air, Saltwater Farm moved its base of operations to York, enabling it to ship directly out of Logan.
Then, in 1971, Myers made what he now regards as the biggest mistake of his life: He sold Saltwater Farm, Inc.
"For a small business, its market penetration was tremendous," says Myers. "But it all disappeared in about three years. It ended up as a telephone number at LaGuardia."
The sale of Saltwater Farm, however, set the stage for Abandon Farm and Myers' pioneering work with mussel aquaculture. Having demonstrated not only that mussels can be raised on the coast of Maine but that species other than eider ducks will eat them, Myers now looks to aquaculture as a way of supplementing the world's food supply while benefiting the Maine economy.
Water purifiers to Iraq
The phrase "Think globally, act locally" comes to mind here. Ed Myers' approach to most things is thoroughly pragmatic. He is more interested in direct action than abstract policy. Take, for instance, the sermon he delivered last month at the Midcoast Unitarian-Universalist Fellowship service in Edgecomb.
Since 1975, Myers has served as a supply (substitute) minister in Baptist, Congregational and Unitarian-Universalist churches in the midcoast region. For the Edgecomb service, he prepared a sermon titled "Marshaling Diversity," in which he preached the doctrine of tolerance, asking worshipers to consider how one might practice tolerance with regard to Saddam Hussein's Iraq.
Indulging a penchant for statistics, Myers noted that it had cost the United States $400,000 for every Iraqi killed during the Gulf War and suggested that we should now be willing to spend a mere $4 million to provide clean drinking water for the tens of thousands of Iraqis who face typhoid and gastroenteritis each spring because of war-damaged sewer and water systems. His novel proposition--Christian in its invocation of the purifying powers of water--was that we send a shipment of $60 L.L. Bean water purifiers to the Iraqi people.
"We need 66,666 of them to give everyone in Iraq two gallons of pure water a day," he told the Universalist fellowship. What he was advocating was not a government-sponsored program, however, but a people-to-people humanitarian effort.
"Washington has gotten so ingrown that the foundation of our foreign policy is all government-to-government stuff. We've lost the local, small, personal touch. The problem looked at in human terms is so much smaller than what you read about."
Ed Myers takes political action personally. During the Gulf War, he, his wife Julia and several other members of CONA (Citizens Opposing Nuclear Arms, a local peace action group) regularly staged a vigil for peace on the Damariscotta Bridge. In 1987, he traveled to Nicaragua with the Witness for Peace program.
"I thought the U.S. government was lying to me and they were," says Myers of his trip to Nicaragua. "All that Contra stuff and Reagan saying they were freedom fighters." In 1989, Myers returned to Nicaragua to help build a day care center.
Myers dates his initial interest in private action for social change to 1954, when he became a trustee of the Pine Tree Society for Crippled Children (now the Pine Tree Society for the Handicapped). Working closely with Bill Haney, the Pine Tree Society's director, Myers used his professional fund-raising experience to help boost the society's annual budget from $200,000 in the 1950s to $2 million today. When Haney died, Myers led the effort to reorganize the Pine Tree Society's management system.
Dave Jackson, a fellow Pine Tree Society board member and Myers' duck-hunting buddy, describes Myers as "pretty hard-headed about fiscal policies" but "socially pretty liberal."
"He's a real gentleman," says Jackson. "That's the real definition of a gentleman--he knows your feelings and he tries to accommodate them."
One-on-one behind the walls
The most personal one-on-one focus of Myers' work for social change over the past 17 years has been his participation in the Yokefellows Ministry at the Maine State Prison. Yokefellows brings together a dozen private citizens and 55 inmates in a weekly ministry of talking and sharing. Prison chaplain Matt Kantrowitz describes Yokefellows as "an oasis of positive, affirming Christian love in the desert of coldness and darkness of the prison."
"Ed has been able to come in here with Yokefellows and be a friend to these guys," says Kantrowitz. "He is gentle and patient with them. He wins them over with his humility. To me, it's an expression of how Jesus would be."
In addition to his involvement with Yokefellows, reports Kantrowitz, Myers has also regularly visited the outcasts of the prison society, inmates in protective custody.
"These are men who are disliked by the general prison population," says Kantrowitz, "but Ed is always right at home with them."
Myers says the prison ministry primarily involves listening to an inmate talk about his life and offering friendly advice.
"Anger leading to violence is sitting there just beneath the surface all the time," he says. You have to try to get yourself into his frame of mind, give him something else to chew on other than his anger."
Though there have been a few notable Yokefellow success stories--one of the first inmates Myers got to know through Yokefellows is now a minister, for instance--Myers does not expect dramatic turnarounds as the result of the Yokefellow Ministry.
"I don't think you look for results," he says. You just go--dropping little tiny pebbles in a big pool."
John Sullivan, an inmate who became a regular Maine Times columnist after Myers put him in touch with this paper, credits Myers with helping him gain a new perspective on life. Sullivan writes that prior to his incarceration, he suffered from "a generally blind faith in government combined with as neck warm. Clark Cove is both the focus of Ed Myers' commercial p st life as a mussel farmer and the sourclacking in our own lives."
Julia Myers suggests that everything her husband does--from aquaculture to the ministry--amounts to "values clarification."
"Ed really likes to cut through the dross and the false fronts that a lot of this world is made up of," she says. "He really likes to get down to what's true and real."
Ed Myers, of course, offers a far more modest assessment of himself.
"I'm just a muddle-headed old man," he says. "I'm not sure we can get peace out of all of this, but I'll try."

Subject: Personal profiles; Owner operator; New England; Aquaculture

Location: US South Bristol ME

People: Myers, Ed

Company / organization: Name: Abandon Farm; SIC: 0273

Classification: 8400: Agriculture industry

Title: The mussel man of Clarks Cove

Publication title: Maine Times; Portland, Me.

Volume: 27

Issue: 13

Pages: 2

Number of pages: 0

Publication year: 1995

Publication date: Jan 06, 1995

Section: 1

Publisher: Maine Times

Place of publication: Portland, Me.

Country of publication: United States, Portland, Me.

Publication subject: Environmental Studies

ISSN: 00250783

Source type: Newspapers

Language of publication: English

Document type: NEWSPAPER

Accession number: 95-16707

ProQuest document ID: 246907477

Document URL: https://search.proquest.com/docview/246907477?accountid=10457

Copyright: Copyright Maine Times Jan 06, 1995

Last updated: 2014-05-23

Database: Global Newsstream

____________________________________________________________

Natural cleansing: Contaminated shellfish 'relayed' to new beds

Author: Anonymous

Publication info: Maine Times ; Portland, Me. [Portland, Me]22 July 1994: 6.

https://search.proquest.com/docview/246911664?accountid=10457

Abstract: Eating contaminated shellfish is an awful experience, and the state is taking action to stop the polluted crustaceans from getting to market. Regulations are being developed to legalize relaying, the moving of shellfish from restricted to open coastal areas where they can cleanse themselves naturally. Hilton (Skip) Applin Jr. of the Department of Marine Resources (DMR) expects oysters and quahogs to be the prime candidates for relaying, rather than clams or mussels, because the former can survive transfer well. Bill Mook, owner of Mook Sea Farms in Damariscotta, says he is interested in looking at the technique as a way to harvest a currently unused portion of Maine's shellfish resource. (excerpt)

Links: http://CX2EF4JW8J.search.serialssolutions.com/directLink?&amp;atitle=Natural+cleansing%3A+Contaminated+shellfish+%27relayed%27+to+new+beds&amp;author=Anonymous&amp;issn=00250783&amp;title=Maine+Times&amp;volume=26&amp;issue=42&amp;date=1994-07-22&amp;spage=6&amp;id=doi:&amp;sid=ProQ_ss&amp;genre=article

Full text: Eating contaminated shellfish is an awful experience, and the state is taking action to stop the polluted crustaceans from getting to market. Regulations are being developed to legalize relaying, the moving of shellfish from restricted to open coastal areas where they can cleanse themselves naturally.
Hilton (Skip) Applin Jr. of the Department of Marine Resources (DMR) expects oysters and quahogs to be the prime candidates for relaying, rather than clams or mussels, because the former can survive transfer well. Bill Mook, owner of Mook Sea Farms in Damariscotta, says he is interested in looking at the technique as a way to harvest a currently unused portion of Maine's shellfish resource.
Besides generating incomes for harvesters and getting more oysters and quahogs to market, Applin says relaying would "remove the temptation to illegally" harvest shellfish in waters contaminated by sewage discharges. The proposed rules, which go to public hearings later this month, call for security measures to insure that relayed shellfish remain long enough in clean saltwater to purge themselves of contaminants. Control procedures may include special nontransferrable permits for harvesters, sampling of shellfish, marking sections of approved areas, keeping records, imposing quarantine periods and warden patrols. Also, the identity of the relayed shellfish would be tagged so it could be traced from the initial harvest site to the distribution point.
Applin thinks a fairly small segment of the industry would be interested in relaying because participants must have a wet storage area. The polluted shellfish would have to remain in clean water long enough to achieve the same bacteriological quality as the species already in the approved waters. The length of time required for biological cleansing is influenced by factors such as temperature, turbidity, salinity and dissolved oxygen. If relay times were shorter than 14 days, the monitoring program would be more intensive, according to the proposed regulations. Shellfish contaminated by coliform bacteria and viruses purge themselves sooner than those poisoned by heavy metals. Some metals can take up to 84 days to deplete.
Tom Howell, owner of Spinney Creek Shellfish in Eliot, operates a Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved private lab and can already legally relay oysters from the polluted Piscataquis River to Spinney Creek. He also depurates steamers. Relaying, he says, "requires intensive testing." and consequently wouldn't be attractive to just anyone.
Moreover, Howell points out that the bulk of the shellfish harvest in Maine is clams, and they are "very difficult to relay." He explains that oysters and quahogs live on the top of mud and sand and "are relayed all over." But clams live in the mud itself and when removed "lose strength," he says. "If relayed for two weeks, they die."
Relaying, Howell notes, isn't new to the industry. The process is allowed by the interstate shellfish commission. Connecticut, for instance, has a $54 million oyster business and "it's all done by relaying."

Subject: Seafoods; Regulation; New England; Fisheries; Consumer protection

Classification: 8400: Agriculture industry; 4310: Regulation

Title: Natural cleansing: Contaminated shellfish 'relayed' to new beds

Publication title: Maine Times; Portland, Me.

Volume: 26

Issue: 42

Pages: 6

Number of pages: 0

Publication year: 1994

Publication date: Jul 22, 1994

Section: 1

Publisher: Maine Times

Place of publication: Portland, Me.

Country of publication: United States, Portland, Me.

Publication subject: Environme ntal Studies

ISSN: 00250783

Source type: Newspapers

Language of publication: English

Document type: NEWSPAPER

Accession number: 94-68914

ProQuest document ID: 246911664

Document URL: https://search.proquest.com/docview/246911664?accountid=10457

Copyright: Copyright Maine Times Jul 22, 1994

Last updated: 2011-11-29

Database: Global Newsstream

____________________________________________________________

A comeback is possible: Maine's most productive clam flats have fallen the farthest

Author: Austin, Phyllis

Publication info: Maine Times ; Portland, Me. [Portland, Me]08 Apr 1994: 12.

https://search.proquest.com/docview/246923322?accountid=10457

Abstract: CLAMMERS KNOW what happens when a fishery crashes: Jobs disappear and competition becomes fierce in the odd pockets of resource abundance. They're also learning that intensive management of flats--and the beneficence of Mother Nature --can cause previously depleted stocks to rebound. Figures for the 1993 soft-shell clam harvest statewide show about a 15 percent decline from the previous year. The Department of Marine Resources (DMR) report puts the total harvest at about 130,000 bushels, worth $9 million, not far from the historic low of 97,000 bushels in 1959. However, harvests in some heavily managed flats in southern Maine appear to have held steady or increased, according to preliminary data. More towns are "starting to get interested" in management, says marine scientist Dana Wallace, known as Mr. Clam for his expertise in the resource. "I think we've got a shift in [awareness]." (excerpt)

Links: http://CX2EF4JW8J.search.serialssolutions.com/directLink?&amp;atitle=A+comeback+is+possible%3A+Maine%27s+most+productive+clam+flats+have+fallen+the+farthest&amp;author=Austin%2C+Phyllis&amp;issn=00250783&amp;title=Maine+Times&amp;volume=26&amp;issue=27&amp;date=1994-04-08&amp;spage=12&amp;id=doi:&amp;sid=ProQ_ss&amp;genre=article

Full text:   CLAMMERS KNOW what happens when a fishery crashes: Jobs disappear and competition becomes fierce in the odd pockets of resource abundance. They're also learning that intensive management of flats--and the beneficence of Mother Nature --can cause previously depleted stocks to rebound.
Figures for the 1993 soft-shell clam harvest statewide show about a 15 percent decline from the previous year. The Department of Marine Resources (DMR) report puts the total harvest at about 130,000 bushels, worth $9 million, not far from the historic low of 97,000 bushels in 1959. However, harvests in some heavily managed flats in southern Maine appear to have held steady or increased, according to preliminary data. More towns are "starting to get interested" in management, says marine scientist Dana Wallace, known as Mr. Clam for his expertise in the resource. "I think we've got a shift in [awareness]."
Limited entry, based on scientific surveys of how much harvesting a flat can sustain, has been a prime management tool. Without that control, says Wallace, diggers could exhaust the clam supply in productive areas virtually overnight. The recent melee in Brunswick shows how competitive clammers are for the restricted number of licenses to harvest a prime flat. ere was a virtual stampede of 60 people for 37 licenses, resulting in minor injuries to two men.
Brunswick, Harpswell, Freeport and Scarborough flats in Casco Bay are clamming's hot spots, says Wallace, a clam consultant to Brunswick and formerly the assistant research director for the DMR. The hardest workers earn up to $40,000 a year, he says. Wanting to protect their clammers' livelihoods, Harpswell voters recently ended a 16-year pact with Brunswick that allowed diggers to work the flats in both towns.
Brian Beal, a University of Maine at Machias biologist and shellfish expert, was "saddened" by that decision. "Greed is going on there. Harpswell wants to save the clams for themselves," he says. "But when times are tough, it's good to be able to go next door" to harvest. Chris Heinig of South Harpswell, the owner of a shellfish production company and a consultant group, thinks it says "philosophically, people aren't prepared to [cooperate] yet" on management that benefits the larger community.
Until recent years, there was open access to clam flats--open to anyone, anywhere, anytime. "Flats were considered saltwater poor farms," says Wallace. "People who didn't have work could go out and make some money." Those who liked it could make a full-time living from clamming, and in 1973 there were almost 6,000 diggers working the flats, he says, compared to about 1,600 today. People felt they had a "right" to dig because the flats were part of the marine "commons," says Heinig.
However, the Legislature in 1963 gave communities the authority to control digging by limiting the number of licenses. To qualify for that authority, Wallace explains, the towns had to raise money for a management program, set up a shellfish or marine resources oversight committee, determine the appropriate number of harvesting licenses, and set up enforcement. Towns were required to sell 10 percent of the licenses to non-residents.
The demise of the clams started after World War II with the return of the labor force, which "cropped off" the populations, according to Dick Clime of Dodge Cove Marine Farms in Newcastle, speaking at the recent Maine Fishermen's Forum. Green crab predation was blamed for the historic low harvest of 1959 and the stocks recovered by the late 1960s. Although there were fluctuations, landings statewide thereafter were fairly high, reaching a "clam bonanza" in 1978 when the bivalve ranked number two behind lobsters and produced $7.47 million for diggers. After 1982, however, the clam populations began to crash, especially in the most productive counties of Washington and Hancock. (Washington County historically produced 45 percent to 75 percent of the state's clam harvest) Cumberland County on Casco Bay, recorded fairly steady landings, as did Lincoln County.
In 1984, the Legislature passed a 2-inch minimum size in an attempt to revive the industry. But there was no major state effort, no local outcry, and no concerted research to get to the bottom of the problem. "I said forceful things," says Beal, "but it was like a dead dog left in the middle of the road. No one [cared]." One of his complaints was that DMR was using its limited number of biologists to take water samples for fecal coliform instead of helping local communities on management programs. Beal didn't deny the importance of water sampling, but felt it could be done "more cheaply" and without breaking the biologists' traditional outreach relationship with towns.
"No one really knows why" the resource plummeted, says Dick Clime. Environmental factors and overharvesting are usually cited as probable contributing factors. Recently, questions have been raised about the impact of blueberry herbicides, which have shown up in Hancock County drinking water. At one point 250 acres of clam flats were closed to clamming along the coast because of pollution, according to Wallace. Some 40 percent of Casco Bay's flats were placed off-limits to clammers, helping to persuade a number of communities, such as Scarborough and Brunswick, to undertake water cleanup projects including new sewage treatment facilities.
Washington and Hancock counties suffered. DMR says more than $7 million worth of clams were harvested from the two counties in 1982. But 10 years later, the harvest was down by more than 70 percent. In 1982, the harvest for the two counties had been 70 percent of Maine's total, and in 1992 it was down to 25 percent.
There has been virtually no natural 'seeding' of the flats Down East by Mother Nature," says Wallace. Where there had been 100 diggers to a flat Down East, the flats now can support only five or 10, he says. Beal says licenses dropped from 2,200 to 410 in the last 11 years, and he calculates that's equivalent to the loss of 1,800 seasonal and full-time jobs. Full-timers Down East are a "dying breed," he says.
Whereas 59 towns had developed clam management ordinances and licenses after the 1963 law was passed, about 18 percent lost interest after the clams disappeared, says Wallace, noting there are now about 40 towns with regulations and "presumably some management." Beal says the towns that dropped their ordinances were primarily Down East, such as Beals Island and Milbridge. "Those that kept ordinances didn't know why" and didn't let the clamming condition dictate the number of available licenses. There was lax enforcement, at best, Beal says.
At the same time, sensible management and Mother Nature have given us a good set of clams for several years in Casco Bay," reports Wallace. Local shellfish committees pinpointed pollution sources, surveyed the clam populations, carried out seeding and transplanting programs, enforced ordinances, and restricted harvesting licenses, he says.
As part of the license requirement, clammers in Freeport, Scarborough and Harpswell were required to put in eight or 12 hours of management work, such as collecting water samples and seeding flats with young clams. Brunswick's tough-on-poachers program was carried out by a hired marine resources staff with a $60,000 budget--one-third from fines against clammers violating the rules. The result was harvests of more than $1 million a year from the flats.
Harvest figures for Lincoln County show it surpassed Cumberland in 1993, but some marine experts question whether diggers from Lincoln are actually harvesting in other counties but selling them to dealers in Lincoln.
In contrast, Beal says, Down East towns perceived clamming as "the job of last resort, At town meetings, it looks to voters like another gift of the welfare system." And the attitude about the flats is they are "managing themselves." For instance, in his hometown of Jonesport, Beal says the shellfish account was no more than $1,500 for a part-time warden. "Is a minuscule amount. People fail to understand in those towns in Washington and Hancock counties that some flats offer a great economic potential," and are much more long-term and healthy for the community than the proposed gambling casino, Beal says, adding, "People have forgotten [the industry] is important."
He noted a study by University of Maine Economist Ralph Townsend that shows if clam landings returned to their highest historical level, it wouldn't affect the price because the demand is there. While the stock has dwindled, the price has steadily risen to about $50 a bushel, compared to about $23 in 1982.
However, Beal says that his greatest fear about the Down East industry is that the flats would rebound as they did in the mid-'60s and "it would be pissed away again...we'd have another boom and bust cycle."
Shellfish experts agree that regional--rather than town-by-town--management is the best approach. Clime says a study shows towns in a regional program outproduce those with single-town management pr grams. Beal explains why in biological terms: "When clams reproduce, gametes [the reproductive cells] go into the water, and in four to six weeks in June and July they are spawning. Even if town X has an excellent management program, it doesn't guarantee a single seed clam will reseed in flats there. The gametes may go to town Y that's not doing a good management job." Regional management also saves towns money, he says.
Heinig thinks the answer to keeping peace in the clamming industry and protecting the resource is to have guaranteed license renewal--rather than first-come, first-serve as is usually the case. "That seems critical--think of how things would be if a lawyer or doctor had to renew their license every year."
Some towns, such as Freeport and Scarborough, already have a preferential system based on a clammer's time in the fishery and work spent on shellfish conservation. Brunswick's conservation work is done by the town's marine resources staff, Heinig notes, so another criterion may have to be worked out for clammers to be assured of a license. He suggests that anyone not guaranteed renewal be dropped into a lottery.
Some say a lottery would be unfair, he says, but there's no perfect answer to everyone who wants to clam or fish, Heinig says. "The groundfish people are feeling the same kind of repercussions of too many people chasing a limited resource. There are those who feel entitled...to the ocean commons...and don't want a limited entry fishery or limited entry of any kind. There are no easy answers. And it's especially hard for resource managers who believe in the democratic way."

Subject: Polls & surveys; New England; Licensing; Legislation; Industrial production; Fishing industry

Classification: 8400: Agriculture industry; 4320: Legislation

Title: A comeback is possible: Maine's most productive clam flats have fallen the farthest

Publication title: Maine Times; Portland, Me.

Volume: 26

Issue: 27

Pages: 12

Number of pages: 0

Publication year: 1994

Publication date: Apr 08, 1994

Section: 1

Publisher: Maine Times

Place of publication: Portland, Me.

Country of publication: United States, Portland, Me.

Publication subject: Environmental Studies

ISSN: 00250783

Source type: Newspapers

Language of publication: English

Document type: NEWSPAPER

Accession number: 94-41615

ProQuest document ID: 246923322

Document URL: https://search.proquest.com/docview/246923322?accountid=10457

Copyright: Copyright Maine Times Apr 08, 1994

Last updated: 2014-05-18

Database: Global Newsstream

____________________________________________________________

At the supermarket: Fish from around the world have replaced the local catch

Author: Austin, Phyllis

Publication info: Maine Times ; Portland, Me. [Portland, Me]04 Feb 1994: 12.

https://search.proquest.com/docview/246887287?accountid=10457

Abstract: Mary Thomas of Portland looks over the seafood display at Shop 'n Save's Forest Avenue market and orders a pound of sea scallops and two pounds of haddock fillet. "No, I don't know where they come from," she answers, "and I don't care -- as long as they are fresh." The scallops are actually from Canada and the frozen-at-sea haddock from the Barents Sea above the Arctic Circle off the northern coast of Russia. Both were caught, transported, processed and placed in the supermarket within days. The frozen-at-sea haddock is "fresher than fresh according to Mike St. Clair, category manager for seafood for Hannaford Bros., which owns 100 Shop 'n Saves from Maine to New York. (excerpt)

Links: http://CX2EF4JW8J.search.serialssolutions.com/directLink?&amp;atitle=At+the+supermarket%3A+Fish+from+around+the+world+have+replaced+the+local+catch&amp;author=Austin%2C+Phyllis&amp;issn=00250783&amp;title=Maine+Times&amp;volume=26&amp;issue=18&amp;date=1994-02-04&amp;spage=12&amp;id=doi:&amp;sid=ProQ_ss&amp;genre=article

Full text:   Mary Thomas of Portland looks over the seafood display at Shop 'n Save's Forest Avenue market and orders a pound of sea scallops and two pounds of haddock fillet. "No, I don't know where they come from," she answers, "and I don't care -- as long as they are fresh."
The scallops are actually from Canada and the frozen-at-sea haddock from the Barents Sea above the Arctic Circle off the northern coast of Russia. Both were caught, transported, processed and placed in the supermarket within days. The frozen-at-sea haddock is "fresher than fresh according to Mike St. Clair, category manager for seafood for Hannaford Bros., which owns 100 Shop 'n Saves from Maine to New York.
As Thomas continues to scrutinize the fish case for a third choice, she passes over oysters from Connecticut, catfish from Mississippi and tuna from Oman in the Middle East. Pointing to the ocean perch from Canada and squid from China, she says, "I wouldn't buy that!" She doesn't like the way they look -- the perch seems a little old to her and the squid "too foreign."
She quickly moves over the locally caught clams lobster, flounder and shrimp to buy a couple of Maine-raised rainbow trout. "I'll enjoy these," she offers.
Another customer, John Jones, is well-informed about the global nature of the fish market today and the declining state of the world's fisheries. "We live in a world economy, and we can no longer be parochial about where we get our fish," he says. Jones mentions that the shrimp he bought last week came from China. It's "too bad," he says, that more of the seafood isn't from Maine because of the need to expand markets for local products.
While he's happy to see that Shop 'n Save is carrying salmon from a fish farm in Eastport, rather than Chile, Jones thinks "wild salmon tastes better." But wild salmon is already rare and commercial fishing has been further curtailed to protect it from extinction. There is even talk of halting the recreational catch-and-release fishery.
Recent media coverage of the sorry state of the Gulf of Maine fisheries and the closure of fishing grounds off the Canadian Maritimes has made people more interested in where the fish they buy comes from, remarks St. Clair.
If it weren't for a worldwide market Shop 'n Save customers wouldn't be able to get some fish, such as haddock. Local haddock is almost commercially extinct, forcing buyers to go to suppliers in Northern Europe, South America, the Far East, the West Coast and Alaska. Dogfish and skates have filled in the Gulf of Maine niches opened by the demise of the valuable groundfish stocks, but they aren't in demand. Shop 'n Save doesn't sell dogfish and skates. Dogfish (the fish in "fish and chips" in England) doesn't hold up well in the store.
Seafood today is 'sourced' by whatever means possible," says St. Clair. "You just can't go to the wharf and buy what you want. There are select times of year you can buy locally ... but you can buy globally all year round." For instance, Maine sea scallops aren't available from November to April.
While a global market provides amazing possibilities, St. Clair says, "the consumer decides for us." The company doesn't try to "determine people's tastes" by offering unusual or new products. "We put out items they want, something we've found out over time by sales data."
"Every now and then we tap into a new item," such as monkfish, tilapia, or sea bass. But if it doesn't sell quickly, Shop 'n Save takes it away. For instance, whole monkfish bombed. "It was good eating but wasn't universally accepted," St. Clair says. "We're still a cod and haddock market." (Monkfish tails, extremely popular in Europe, are available on a store-by-store basis.)
The No. 1 item is frozen-at-sea haddock from the Barents Sea, and St. Clair says Mainers will "eat it as long as it's available or isn't so expensive." He says Shop n' Save has been told by the foreign seller "they can supply it to us for several years before there's a concern over depleting the stock." St. Clair notes that there's not a strong demand for haddock in Europe, which leaves the product available to Maine and the rest of New England.
"Fish is processed differently today," he explains. "It's now frozen whole and that stops the aging process." It may take a week for the fish to get to the processor, but as long as it's frozen, there is no deterioration. St. Clair counts the processor-to-store time as four days, based on the time the fish is thawed. "We typically don't leave it out more than two days in the case," he says.
Haddock, cod and other frozen-at-sea varieties are marked as such according to law. Other labels include "fresh" and "previously frozen."
While seafood industry observers predict more reliance on overseas fisheries, the outlook for the long-term high seas catch isn't good, according to WorldWatch, a research group in Washington. The world's oceans are deteriorating. The United Nations Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) estimates that all 17 of the world's major fishing areas have either reached or exceeded their natural limits, and nine of them -- areas Maine is increasingly dependent on -- are in serious decline. The resulting drop in the per capita seafood catch -- an estimated 9 percent from 1989 to 1993 -- will continue as population grows, driving seafood prices ever higher, says WorldWatch research associate Peter Weber.

Subject: New England; Imports; Grocery stores; Fishing industry

Location: US Topsham ME

Classification: 8400: Agriculture industry; 8390: Retail stores, includes groceries; 1300: International trade & foreign investment

Title: At the supermarket: Fish from around the world have replaced the local catch

Publication title: Maine Times; Portland, Me.

Volume: 26

Issue: 18

Pages: 12

Number of pages: 0

Publication year: 1994

Publication date: Feb 04, 1994

Section: 1

Publisher: Maine Times

Place of publication: Portland, Me.

Country of publication: United States, Portland, Me.

Publication subject: Environmental Studies

ISSN: 00250783

Source type: Newspapers

Language of publication: English

Document type: NEWSPAPER

Accession number: 94-25071

ProQuest document ID: 246887287

Document URL: https://search.proquest.com/docview/246887287?accountid=10457

Copyright: Copyright Maine Times Feb 04, 1994

Last updated: 2014-05-18

Database: Global Newsstream

____________________________________________________________

Contact us at: http://www.proquest.com/go/pqissupportcontact
Database copyright © 2020 ProQuest LLC. All rights reserved.
Terms and Conditions: https://search.proquest.com/info/termsAndConditions